THE  LIBRARY 
BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 
PROVO,  UTAH 


A  V 


Digitized  by 

the  Internet  Archive 

in  2014 

https://archive.org/details/odysseyofhomer01home1845 


PHULADEX.PHXA 


THE 


ODYSSEY 


or 


HOMER. 


TRANSLATED  BY 


ALEXANDER  POPE. 


VOL.  I. 


PHILADELPHIA: 
PUBLISHED  BY  JAMES  CRISSY,  MINOR  STREET. 

1845. 


J.  Crissy,  Printer. 


THE  LIBRARY 
HAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 
PROVO,  UTAH 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


BOOK  I. 

THE  ARGUMENT. 

Minerva's  descent  to  ithaca. 

THE  poem  opens  within  forty-eight  days  of  the  arrival  of  Ulysses 
in  his  dominions.  He  had  now  remained  seven  years  in  the 
island  of  Calypso,  when  the  gods  assembled  in  council,  proposed 
the  method  of  his  departure  from  thence,  and  his  return  to  his 
native  country.  For  this  purpose  it  is  concluded  to  send  Mercury 
to  Calypso,  and  Pallas  immediately  descends  to  Ithaca.  She  holds 
a  conference  with  Telemachus,  in  the  shape  of  Mentes  king  of  the 
Taphians:  in  which  she  advises  him  to  take  a  journey,  inquest 
of  his  father  Ulysses,  to  Pylos  and  Sparta,  where  Nestor  and  Me- 
nelaus  yet  reigned;  then,  after  having  visibly  displayed  her  divi- 
nity, disappears.  The  suitors  of  Penelope  make  great  entertain- 
ments, and  riot  in  her  palace  till  night.  Phemius  sings  to  them 
the  return  of  the  Grecians,  till  Penelope  puts  a  stop  to  the  song. 
Some  words  arise  between  the  suitors  and  Telemachus,  who 
summons  the  council  to  meet  the  day  following. 

The  man  for  wisdom's  various  arts  renown'd, 
Long  exercis'd  in  woes,  O  muse  !  resound ; 
Who,  when  his  arms  had  wrought  the  destin'd  fall 
Of  sacred  Troy,  and  raz'd  her  heaven-built  wall, 
Wandering  from  clime  to  clime,  observant  stray'd, 
Their  manners  noted,  and  their  states  survey 'd. 
On  stormy  seas  unnumber'd  toils  he  bore, 


1 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  1. 


Safe  with  his  friends  to  gain  his  natal  shore  : 
Vain  toils !  their  impious  folly  dar'd  to  prey 
On  herds  devoted  to  the  god  of  day ; 
The  god  vindictive  doom'd  them  never  more 
(Ah,  men  unbless'd  !)  to  touch  that  natal  shore. 
O  snatch  some  portion  of  these  acts  from  fate, 
Celestial  muse!  and  to  our  world  relate. 

Now  at  their  native  realms  the  Greeks  arriv'd ; 
All  who  the  war  of  ten  long  years  surviv'd, 
And  scap'd  the  perils  of  the  gulfy  main. 
Ulysses,  sole  of  all  the  victor  train, 
An  exile  from  his  dear  paternal  coast, 
Deplor'd  his  absent  queen,  and  empire  lost. 
Calypso  in  her  caves  constraint  his  stay, 
With  sweet,  reluctant,  amorous  delay : 
In  vain — for  now  the  circling  years  disclose 
The  day  predestin'd  to  reward  his  woes. 
At  length  his  Ithaca  is  given  by  fate, 
Where  yet  new  labours  his  arrival  wait ; 
At  length  their  rage  the  hostile  powers  restrain, 
All  but  the  ruthless  monarch  of  the  main. 
But  now  the  god,  remote,  a  heavenly  guest, 
In  Ethiopia  grac'd  the  genial  feast; 
(A  race  divided,  whom  with  sloping  rays 
The  rising  and  descending  sun  surveys ;) 
There  on  the  world's  extremest  verge,  rever'd 
With  hecatombs  and  prayer  in  pomp  preferr'd, 
Distant  he  lay ;  while  in  the  bright  abodes 
Of  high  Olympus  Jove  conven'd  the  gods; 
Th'  assembly  thus  the  sire  supreme  address'd, 
Egysthus'  fate  revolving  in  his  breast, 
Whom  young  Orestes  to  the  dreary  coast 
Of  Pluto  sent,  a  blood-polluted  ghost : 

"  Perverse  mankind  !  whose  wills,  created  free, 
Charge  all  their  woes  on  absolute  decree ; 


Book  1. 


THE    0  D  V  S  S  E  Y  . 


5 


All  to  the  dooming  gods  their  guilt  translate, 
And  follies  are  miscalPd  the  crimes  of  fate. 
When  to  his  lust  Egysthus  gave  the  rein, 
Did  fate,  or  we,  the  adulterous  act  constrain  ? 
Did  fate,  or  we,  when  great  Atrides  died, 
Urge  the  bold  traitor  to  the  regicide  1 
Hermes  I  sent,  while  yet  his  soul  remain' d 
Sincere  from  royal  blood,  and  faith  profan'd  ; 
To  warn  the  wretch,  that  young  Orestes,  grown 
To  manly  years,  should  reassert  the  throne. 
Yet  impotent  of  mind,  and  uncontroll'd, 
He  plung'd  into  the  gulf  which  heaven  foretold." 

Here  paus'd  the  god  ;  and  pensive  thus  replies 
Minerva,  graceful  with  her  azure  eyes  : 
"  O  thou  !  from  whom  the  whole  creation  springs, 
The  source  of  power  on  earth  deriv'd  to  kings  ! 
His  death  was  equal  to  the  direful  deed ; 
So  may  the  man  of  blood  be  doom'd  to  bleed  ! 
But  grief  and  rage  alternate  wound  my  breast 
For  brave  Ulysses,  still  by  fate  oppress'd. 
Amidst  an  isle,  around  whose  rocky  shore 
The  forests  murmur,  and  the  surges  roar, 
The  blameless  hero  from  his  wish'd-for  home 
A  goddess  guards  in  her  enchanted  dome. 
(Atlas  her  sire,  to  whose  far-piercing  eye 
The  wonders  of  the  deep  expanded  lie; 
Th'  eternal  columns  which  on  earth  he  rears 
End  in  the  starry  vault,  and  prop  the  spheres.) 
By  his  fair  daughter  is  the  chief  confin'd, 
Who  sooths  to  dear  delight  his  anxious  mind : 
Successless  all  her  soft  caresses  prove, 
To  banish  from  his  breast  his  country's  love  ; 
To  see  the  smoke  from  his  lov'd  palace  rise.  } 
While  the  dear  isle  in  distant  prospect  lies,  > 
With  that  contentment  could  he  close  his  eyes  !  ) 


6 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  h 


And  will  Omnipotence  neglect  to  save 
The  suffering  virtue  of  the  wise  and  brave? 
Must  he,  whose  altars  on  the  Phrygian  shore 
With  frequent  rites,  and  pure,  avow'd  thy  pow'r, 
Be  doom'd  the  worst  of  human  ills  to  prove, 
Unbless'd,  abandon'd  to  the  wrath  of  Jove  T' 

"Daughter!  what  words  have  pass'd  thy  lips  un- 
weigh'd  ? 

(Replied  the  thunderer  to  the  martial  maid) 
Deem  not  unjustly  by  my  doom  oppress'd 
Of  human  race  the  wisest  and  the  best. 
Neptune,  by  prayer  repentant  rarely  won, 
Afflicts  the  chief,  to'  avenge  his  giant  son, 
Whose  visual  orb  Ulysses  robb'd  of  light ; 
Great  Polypheme,  of  more  than  mortal  might ! 
Him  young  Thoosa  bore  (the  bright  increase 
Of  Phorcys,  dreaded  in  the  sounds  and  seas,) 
Whom  Neptune  ey'd  with  bloom  of  beauty  bless'd, 
And  in  his  cave  the  yielding  nymph  compress'd. 
For  this,  the  god  constrains  the  Greek  to  roam, 
A  hopeless  exile  from  his  native  home, 
From  death  alone  exempt — but  cease  to  mourn  ; 
Let  all  combine  t'  achieve  his  wish'd  return  ; 
Neptune,  aton'd,  his  wrath  shall  now  refrain, 
Or  thwart  the  synod  of  the  gods  in  vain." 

"  Father  and  king  ador'd !  Minerva  cried, 
Since  all  who  in  th'  Olympian  bower  reside 
Now  make  the  wandering  Greek  their  public  care, 
Let  Hermes  to  th'  Atlantic  isle*  repair ; 
Bid  him,  arriv'd  in  bright  Calypso's  court, 
The  sanction  of  th'  assembled  powers  report : 
That  wise  Ulysses  to  his  native  land 
Must  speed,  obedient  to  their  high  command. 


*  Ogygia. 


Book  1, 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


7 


Meantime  Telemachus,  the  blooming  heir 
Of  sea-girt  Ithaca,  demands  my  care  : 
'  Tis  mine,  to  form  his  green  unpractis'd  years 
In  sage  debates;  surrounded  with  his  poors, 
To  save  the  state  ;  and  timely  to  restrain 
The  bold  intrusion  of  the  suitor-train  ; 
Who  crowd  his  palace,  and  with  lawless  pow'r 
His  herds  and  flocks  in  feastful  rites  devour. 
To  distant  Sparta,  and  the  spacious  waste 
Of  sandy  Pyle,  the  royal  youth  shall  haste. 
There,  warm  with  filial  love,  the  cause  inquire 
That  from  his  realm  retards  his  godlike  sire: 
Delivering  early  to  the  voice  of  fame 
The  promise  of  a  great,  immortal  name." 

She  said  :  the  sandals  of  celestial  mould, 
Fledg'd  with  ambrosial  plumes,  and  rich  with  gold, 
Surround  her  feet :  with  these  sublime  she  sails 
Th'  aerial  space,  and  mounts  the  winged  gales : 
O'er  earth  and  ocean  wide  prepar'd  to  soar, 
Her  dreaded  arm  a  beamy  javelin  bore, 
Ponderous  and  vast ;  which,  when  her  fury  burns, 
Proud  tyrants  humbles,  and  whole  hosts  o'erturns. 
From  high  Olympus  prone  her  flight  she  bends, 
And  in  the  realm  of  Ithaca  descends  : 
Her  lineaments  divine,  the  grave  disguise 
Of  Mentes'  form  conceal'd  from  human  eyes  : 
(Mentes,  the  monarch  of  the  Taphian  land) 
A  glittering  spear  wav'd  awful  in  her  hand. 
There  in  the  portal  plac'd,  the  heaven  born-maid 
Enormous  riot  and  misrule  survey 'd. 
On  hides  of  beeves,  before  the  palace-gate, 
(Sad  spoils  of  luxury)  the  suitors  sat. 
With  rival  art,  and  ardour  in  their  mien, 
At  chess  they  vie,  to  captivate  the  queen  ; 
Divining  of  their  loves.    Attending  nigh, 


e 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  1. 


A  menial  train  the  flowing  bowl  supply : 

Others,  apart,  the  spacious  hall  prepare, 
And  form  the  costly  feast  with  busy  care. 
There  young  Telemachus,  his  bloomy  face 
Glowing  celestial  sweet,  with  godlike  grace 
Amid  the  circle  shines  :  but  hope  and  fear 
(Painful  vicissitude !)  his  bosom  tear. 
Now  imag'd  in  his  mind,  he  sees  restor'd,  ) 
In  peace  and  joy,  the  people's  rightful  lord  ;  > 
The  proud  oppressors  fly  the  vengeful  sword.  } 
While  his  fond  soul  these  fancied  triumphs  swell'd, 
The  stranger-guest,  the  royal  youth  beheld  : 
Griev'd  that  a  visitant  so  long  should  wait 
Unmark'd,  unhonour'd,  at  a  monarch's  gate  ; 
Instant  he  flew  with  hospitable  haste, 
And  the  new  friend  with  courteous  air  embrac'd. 
tl  Stranger  !  whoe'er  thou  art,  securely  rest, 
Aflianc'd  in  my  faith,  a  friendly  guest : 
Approach  the  dome,  the  social  banquet  share, 
And  then  the  purpose  of  thy  soul  declare." 

Thus  affable  and  mild,  the  prince  precedes, 
And  to  the  dome  th'  unknown  celestial  leads. 
The  spear  receiving  from  her  hand,  he  plac'd 
Against  a  column,  fair  with  sculpture  grac'd  ; 
Where  seemly  rang'd  in  peaceful  order  stood 
Ulysses'  arms,  now  long  disus'd  to  blood. 
He  led  the  goddess  to  the  sovereign  seat, 
Her  feet  supported  with  a  stool  of  state ; 
(A  purple  carpet  spread  the  pavement  wide) 
Then  drew  his  seat,  familiar,  to  her  side ; 
Far  from  the  suitor-train,  a  brutal  crowd, 
With  insolence,  and  wine,  elate  and  loud  ; 
Where  the  free  guest,  unnoted,  might  relate^ 
If  haply  concious,  of  his  father's  fate. 
*rhe  golden  ewer  a  maid  obsequious  brings, 


Book  1. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


9 


Replenish'd  from  the  cool  translucent  springs ; 
With  copious  water  the  bright  vase  supplies 
A  silver  laver,  of  capacious  size  : 
They  wash.    The  tables  in  fair  order  spread, 
They  heap  the  glittering  cannisters  with  bread  : 
Viands  of  various  kinds  allure  the  taste, 
Of  choicest  sort  and  savour,  rich  repast ! 
Delicious  wines  th'  attending  herald  brought ; 
The  gold  gave  lustre  to  the  purple  draught. 
Lur'd  with  the  vapour  of  the  fragrant  feast, 
In  rush'd  the  suitors  with. voracious  haste  : 
Marshall' d  in  order  due,  to  each  a. sewer 
Presents,  to  bathe  his  hands,  a  radiant  ewer. 
Luxurious  then  they  feast.    Observant  round 
Gay  stripling  youths  the  brimming  goblets  crown'd. 
The  rage  of  hunger  quell'd,  they  all  advance, 
And  form  to  measur'd  airs  the  mazy  dance. 
To  Phemius  was  consign'd  the  chorded  lyre, 
Whose  hand  reluctant  touch'd  the  warbling  wire  : 
Phemius,  whose  voice  divine  could  sweetest  sing 
High  strains,  responsive  to  the  vocal  string. 

Meanwhile,  in  whispers  to  his  heavenly  guest, 
His  indignation  thus  the  prince  express'd : 

"  Indulge  my  rising  grief,  whilst  these,  my  friend, 
With  song  and  dance  the  pompous  revel  end. 
Light  is  the  dance,  and  doubly  sweet  the  lays, 
When,  for  the  dear  delight,  another  pays. 
His  treasur'd  stores  these  cormorants  consume, 
Whose  bones,  defrauded  of  a  regal  tomb 
And  common  turf,  lie  naked  on  the  plain, 
Or  doom'd  to  welter  in  the  whelming  main. 
Should  he  return,  that  troop  so  blithe  and  bold, 
With  purple  robes  inwrought,  and  stiff  with  gold, 
Precipitant  in  fear,  would  wing  their  flight, 
And  curse  their  cumbrous  pride's  unwieldy  weight. 


10 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  1. 


But,  ah,  I  dream  ! — th'  appointed  hour  is  fled, 
And  hope,  too  long  with  vain  delusion  fed, 
Deaf  to  the  rumour  of  fallacious  fame, 
Gives  to  the  roll  of  death  his  glorious  name  ! 
With  venial  freedom  let  me  now  demand 
Thy  name,  thy  lineage,  and  paternal  land  : 
Sincere,  from  whence  began  thy  course,  recite, 
And  to  what  ship  I  owe  the  friendly  freight? 
Now  first  to  me  this  visit  dost  thou  deign, 
Or  number'd  in  my  father's  social  train  ^ 
All  who  deserv'd  his  choice  he  made  his  own, 
And  curious  much  to  know,  he  far  was  known." 

"  My  birth  I  boast  (the  blue-ey'd  virgin  cries) 
From  great  Anchiolus,  renown'd  and  wise : 
Mentes  my  name  ;  I  rule  the  Taphian  race, 
"Whose  bounds  the  deep  circumfluent  waves  embrace : 
A  duteous  people,  and  industrious  isle, 
To  naval  arts  inur'd,  and  stormy  toil. 
Freighted  with  iron  from  my  native  land, 
I  steer  my  voyage  to  the  Brutian  strand  ; 
To  gain  by  commerce,  for  the  labour'd  mass, 
A  just  proportion  of  refulgent  brass. 
Far  from  your  capital,  my  ship  resides 
At  Reithrus,  and  secure  at  anchor  rides ; 
Where  waving  groves  on  airy  Neion  grow, 
Supremely  tall,  and  shade  the  deeps  below. 
Thence  to  revisit  your  imperial  dome, 
An  old  hereditary  guest  I  come  : 
Your  father's  friend.    Laertes  can  relate 
Our  faith  unspotted,  and  its  early  date ; 
Who  press'd  with  heart-corroding  grief  and  years, 
To  the  gay  court  a  rural  shed  prefers, 
Where,  sole  of  all  his  train,  a  matron  sage 
Supports  with  homely  food  his  drooping  age ; 
With  feeble  steps  from  marshalling  his  vines 


Book  1. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Returning  sad,  when  toilsome  day  declines. 

With  friendly  speed,  induc'd  by  erring  fame, 

To  hail  Ulysses'  safe  return  I  came  : 

But  still  the  frown  of  some  celestial  pow'r 

With  envious  joy  retards  the  blissful  hour. 

Let  not  your  soul  be  sunk  in  sad  despair  ; 

He  lives,  he  breathes  this  heavenly  vital  air, 

Among  a  savage  race,  whose  shelfy  bounds 

With  ceaseless  roar  the  foaming  deep  surrounds. 

The  thoughts  which  roll  within  my  ravish'd  breast, 

To  me,  no  seer,  th'  inspiring  gods  suggest ; 

Nor  skill'd  nor  studious,  with  prophetic  eye 

To  judge  the  winged  omens  of  the  sky. 

Yet  hear  this  certain  speech,  nor  deem  it  vain; 

Though  adamantine  bonds  the  chief  restrain, 

The  dire  restraint  his  wisdom  will  defeat, 

And  soon  restore  him  to  his  regal  seat. 

But,  generous  youth  !  sincere  and  free  declare, 

Are  you,  of  manly  growth,  his  royal  heirl 

For  sure  Ulysses  in  your  look  appears, 

The  same  his  features,  if  the  same  his  years. 

Such  was  that  face,  on  which  I  dwelt  with  joy 

Ere  Greece  assembled  stemm'd  the  tides  to  Troy  ; 

But  parting  then  for  that  detested  shore, 

Our  eyes,  unhappy  !  never  greeted  more." 

"  To  prove  a  genuine  birth  (the  prince  replies) 
On  female  truth  assenting  faith  relies ; 
Thus  manifest  of  right,  I  build  my  claim 
Sure  founded  on  a  fair  maternal  fame, 
Ulysses'  son  :  but  happier  he  whom  fate 
Hath  plac'd  beneath  the  storms  which  toss  the  great 
Happier  the  son  whose  hoary  sire  is  bless'd 
With  humble  affluence,  and  domestic  rest ! 
Happier  than  I,  to  future  empire  born, 
But  doom'd  a  father's  wretched  fate  to  mourn !" 


12 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  1. 


To  whom  with  aspect  mild,  the  guest  divine  : 
"  O  true  descendant  of  a  sceptered  line  ! 
The  gods,  a  glorious  fate,  from  anguish  free, 
To  chaste  Penelope's  increase  decree. 
But  say,  yon  jovial  troop  so  gaily  dress'd, 
Is  this  a  bridal  or  a  friendly  feast  ? 
Or  from  their  deed  I  rightlier  may  divine, 
Unseemly  flown  with  insolence  and  wine; 
Unwelcome  revellers,  whose  lawless  joy 
Pains  the  sage  ear,  and  hurts  the  sober  eye  V* 

"  Magnificence  of  old  (the  prince  replied) 
Beneath  our  roof  with  virtue  could  reside ; 
Unblam'd  abundance  crown'd  the  royal  board, 
What  time  this  dome  rever'd  her  prudent  lord ; 
Who  now.  so  heaven  decrees,  is  doom'd  to  mourn, 
Bitter  constraint !  erroneous  and  forlorn. 
Better  the  chief,  on  llion's  hostile  plain, 
Had  fall'n  surrounded  with  his  warlike  train; 
Or  safe  return'd,  the  race  of  glory  pass'd, 
New  to  his  friends'  embrace,  had  breath'd  his  last ! 
Then  grateful  Greece  with  streaming  eyes  would  raise 
Historic  marbles,  to  record  his  praise ; 
His  praise,  eternal  on  the  faithful  stone, 
Had  with  transmissive  honour  grac'd  his  son. 
Now  snatch'd  by  harpies  to  the  dreary  coast, 
Sunk  is  the  hero,  and  his  glory  lost: 
Vanish'd  at  once !  unheard  of,  and  unknown ! 
And  I  his  heir  in  misery  alone. 
Nor  for  a  dear  lost  father  only  flow 
The  filial  tears,  but  wo  succeeds  to  wo: 
To  tempt  the  spouseless  queen  with  amorous  wiles, 
Resort  the  nobles  from  the  neighbouring  isles; 
From  Samos,  circled  with  th'  Ionian  main, 
Dulichium,  and  Zacynthus'  sylvan  reign  : 
E'en  with  presumptuous  hope  her  bed  t'  ascend, 


Book  1. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


The  lords  of  Ithaca  their  right  pretend. 
She  seems  attentive  to  their  pleaded  vows, 
Her  heart  detesting  what  her  ear  allows. 
They,  vain  expectants  of  the  bridal  hour, 
My  stores  in  riotous  expense  devour, 
In  feast  and  dance  the  mirthful  months  employ, 
And  meditate  my  doom,  to  crown  their  joy." 

With  tender  pity  touch'd,  the  goddess  cried  : 
11  Soon  may  kind  heaven  a  sure  relief  provide, 
Soon  may  your  sire  discharge  the  vengeance  due, 
And  all  your  wrongs  the  proud  oppressors  rue  ! 
Oh !  in  that  portal  should  the  chief  appear, 
Each  hand  tremendous  with  a  brazen  spear, 
In  radiant  panoply  his  limbs  incas'd 
(For  so  of  old  my  father's  court  he  grac'd, 
When  socinl  mirth  unbent  his  serious  soul, 
O'er  the  full  banquet,  and  the  sprightly  bowl :) 
He  then  from  Ephyre,  the  fair  domain 
Of  llus,  sprung  from  Jason's  royal  strain, 
Measur'd  a  length  of  seas,  a  toilsome  length,  in  vain. 
For  voyaging  to  learn  the  direful  art 
To  taint  with  deadly  drugs  the  barbed  dart ; 
Observant  of  the  gods,  and  sternly  just, 
llus  refus'd  t'  impart  the  baneful  trust: 
With  friendlier  zeal  my  father's  soul  was  fir'd, 
The  drugs  he  knew,  and  gave  the  boon  desir'd. 
Appear'd  he  now  with  such  heroic  port, 
As  then  conspicuous  at  the  Taphian  court ; 
Soon  should  yon  boasters  cease  their  haughty  strife, 
Or  each  atone  his  guilty  love  with  life. 
But  of  his  wish'd  return  the  care  resign ; 
Be  future  vengeance  to  the  powers  divine. 
My  sentence  hear:  with  stern  distaste  avow'd, 
To  their  own  districts  drive  the  suitor  crowd : 
When  next  the  morning  warms  the  purple  east} 


14 


T  HE    ODY SS E  Y . 


Book  L 


Convoke  the  peerage,  and  the  gods  attest ; 
The  sorrows  of  your  inmost  soul  relate; 
And  form  sure  plans  to  save  the  sinking  state. 
Should  second  love  a  pleasing  flame  inspire, 
And  the  chaste  queen  connubial  rites  require; 
Dismiss'd  with  honour,  let  her  hence  repair 
To  great  Icarius,  whose  paternal  care 
Will  guide  her  passion,  and  reward  her  choice 
With  wealthy  dower,  and  bridal  gifts  of  price. 
Then  let  this  dictate  of  my  love  prevail : 
Instant,  to  foreign  realms  prepare  to  sail, 
To  learn  your  father's  fortunes :  fame  may  prove, 
Or  omen'd  voice  (the  messenger  of  Jove,) 
Propitious  to  the  search.    Direct  your  toil 
Through  the  wide  ocean  first  to  sandy  Pyle  ; 
Of  Nestor,  hoary  sage,  his  doom  demand  : 
Then  speed  your  voyage  to  the  Spartan  strand  ; 
For  young  Atrides  to  th'  Achaian  coast 
Arriv:d  the  last  of  all  the  victor  host. 
If  yet  Ulysses  views  the  light,  forbear, 
Till  the  fleet  hours  restore  the  circling  year: 
But  if  his  soul  hath  wing'd  the  destin'd"  flight, 
Inhabitant  of  deep  disastrous  night ; 
Homeward  with  pious  speed  repass  the  main, 
To  the  pale  shade  funeral  rites  ordain, 
Plant  the  fair  column  o'er  the  vacant  grave, 
A  hero's  honours  let  the  hero  have. 
With  decent  grief  the  royal  dead  deplor'd, 
For  the  chaste  queen  select  an  equal  lord. 
Then  let  revenge  your  daring  mind  employ,  ) 
By  fraud  or  force  the  suitor-train  destroy,  > 
And,  starting  into  manhood,  scorn  the  boy.  ) 
Hast  thou  not  heard  how  young  Orestes,  fir'd 
With  great  revenge,  immortal  praise  acquir'd  1 
His  virgin  sword,  Egysthus'  veins  imbrued ; 


Book  1. 


THE    ODYSS  E  V  . 


The  murderer  fell,  and  blood  aton'd  for  blood. 

0  greatly  bless'd  with  every  blooming  grace ! 
With  equal  steps  the  paths  of  glory  trace; 
Join  to  that  royal  youth's  your  rival  name, 
And  shine  eternal  in  the  sphere  of  fame. — 
But  my  associates  now  my  stay  deplore, 
Impatient  on  the  hoarse-resounding  shore, 
Thou,  heedful  of  advice,  secure  proceed; 
My  praise  the  precept  is,  be  thine  the  deed." 

"  The  counsel  of  my  friend,  (the  youth  rejoin'd) 
Imprints  conviction  on  my  grateful  mind. 
So  fathers  speak  (persuasive  speech  and  mild) 
Their  sage  experience  to  the  favourite  child. 
But,  since  to  part,  for  sweet  refection  due 
The  genial  viands  let  my  train  renew ; 
And  the  rich  pledge  of  plighted  faith  receive. 
Worthy  the  heir  of  Ithaca  to  give." 

"  Defer  the  promis'd  boon  (the  goddess  cries, 
Celestial  azure  brightening  in  her  eyes,) 
And  let  me  now  regain  the  Reithrian  port: 
From  Temese  return'd,  your  royal  court 

1  shall  revisit ;  and  that  pledge  receive ; 
And  gifts,  memorial  of  our  friendship,  leave." 

Abrupt,  with  eagle-speed  she  cut  the  sky; 
Instant  invisible  to  mortal  eye. 
Then  first  he  recogniz'd  th'  ethereal  guest : 
Wonder  and  joy  alternate  fire  his  breast ; 
Heroic  thoughts,  infus'd,  his  heart  dilate : 
Revolving  much  his  father's  doubtful  fate, 
At  length  compos'd,  he  join'd  the  suitor  throng; 
Hush'd  in  attention  to  the  warbled  song. 
His  tender  theme  the  charming  lyrist  chose, 
Minerva's  anger,  and  the  direful  woes 
Which  voyaging  from  Troy  the  victors  bore, 
While  storms  vindictive  intercept  the  shore. 


16 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  I, 


The  shrilling  airs  the  vaulted  roof  rebounds, 
Reflecting  to  the  queen  the  silver  sounds. 
With  grief  renew'd  the  weeping  fair  descends ; 
Their  sovereign's  step  a  virgin  train  attends: 
A  veil  of  richest  texture  wrought,  she  wears, 
And  silent  to  the  joyous  hall  repairs. 
There  from  the  portal,  with  her  mild  command, 
Thus  gently  checks  the  minstrel's  tuneful  hand  : 

"  Phemius  !  let  acts  of  gods  and  heroes  old, 
What  ancient  bards  in  hall  and  bower  have  told, 
Attemper'd  to  the  lyre,  your  voice  employ  ; 
Such  the  pleas'd  ear  will  drink  with  silent  joy. 
But  oh  !  forbear  that  dear  disastrous  name, 
To  sorrow  sacred,  and  secure  of  fame  : 
My  bleeding  bosom  sickens  at  the  sound, 
And  every  piercing  note  inflicts  a  wound." 

w  Why  dearest  object  of  my  duteous  love, 
(Replied  the  prince)  will  you  the  bard  reprove  ? 
Oft,  Jove's  ethereal  rays,  resistless  fire, 
The  chanter's  soul  and  raptur'd  song  inspire  ; 
Instinct  divine !  nor  blame,  severe,  his  choice, 
Warbling  the  Grecian  woes  with  harp  and  voice  ; 
For  novel  lays  attract  our  ravish'd  ears  ; 
But  old,  the  mind  with  inattention  hears : 
Patient  permit  the  sadly-pleasing  strain ; 
Familiar  now  with  grief,  your  tears  refrain, 
And  in  the  public  wo  forget  your  own : 
You  weep  not  for  a  perish'd  lord,  alone. 
What  Greeks,  now  wandering  in  the  Stygian  gloom^ 
With  your  Ulysses  shar'd  an  equal  doom ! 
Your  widow'd  hours,  apart,  with  female  toil 
And  various  labours  of  the  loom,  beguile; 
There  rule,  from  palace-cares  remote  and  free ; 
That  care  to  man  belongs,  and  most  to  rne." 


Book  1. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


17 


Mature  beyond  his  years,  the  queen  admires 
His  sage  reply,  and  with  her  train  retires. 
Then  swelling  sorrows  burst  their  former  bounds, 
With  echoing  grief  afresh  the  dome  resounds ; 
Till  Pallas,  piteous  of  her  plaintive  cries, 
In  slumber  clos'd  her  silver-streaming  eyes. 

Meantime,  rekindled  at  the  royal  charms, 
Tumultuous  love  each  beating  bosom  warms ; 
Intemperate  rage  a  wordy  war  began ; 
But  bold  Telemachus  assum'd  the  man. 
"Instant  (he  cried)  your  female  discord  end, 
Ye  deedless  boasters  !  and  the  song  attend ; 
Obey  that  sweet  compulsion,  nor  profane 
With  dissonance  the  smooth  melodious  strain. 
Pacific  now  prolong  the  jovial  feast ; 
But  when  the  dawn  reveals  the  rosy  east, 
I  to  the  peers  assembled  shall  propose 
The  firm  resolve,  I  here  to  few  disclose. 
No  longer  live  the  cankers  of  my  court ; 
All  to  your  several  states  with  speed  resort ; 
Waste  in  wild  riot  what  your  land  allows, 
There  ply  the  early  feast,  and  late  carouse. 
But  if,  to  honour  lost,  'tis  still  decreed 
For  you  my  bowl  shall  flow,  my  flock  shall  bleed ; 
Judge  and  revenge  my  right,  impartial  Jove ! — 
By  him  and  all  th'  immortal  thrones  above, 
(A  sacred  oath)  each  proud  oppressor,  slain, 
Shall  with  inglorious  gore  this  marble  stain  !" 

Aw'd  by  the  prince,  thus  haughty,  bold,  and  young, 
Rage  gnaw'd  the  lip,  and  wonder  chained  the  tongue. 
Silence  at  length  the  gay  Antinous  broke, 
Constrain'd  a  smile,  and  thus  ambiguous  spoke : 
"  What  god  to  your  untutor'd  youth  affords 
This  headlong  torrent  of  amazing  words  ? 

B 


18 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  1. 


May  Jove  delay  thy  reign,  and  cumber  late 
So  bright  a  genius  with  the  toils  of  state  !" 

"  Those  toils  (Telemachus,  serene,  replies) 
Have  charms,  with  all  their  weight,  t'  allure  the  wise. 
Fast  by  the  throne  obsequious  fame  resides, 
And  wealth  incessant  rolls  her  golden  tides. 
Nor  let  Antinous  rage,  if  strong  desire 
Of  wealth  and  fame  a  youthful  bosom  fire : 
Elect  by  Jove  his  delegate  of  sway, 
With  joyous  pride  the  summons  I'd  obey. 
Whene'er  Ulysses  roams  the  realm  of  night, 
Should  factious  power  dispute  my  lineal  right, 
Some  other  Greeks  a  fairer  claim  may  plead  ; 
To  your  pretence  their  title  would  precede. 
At  least  the  sceptre  lost,  I  still  should  reign 
Sole  o'er  my  vassals,  and  domestic  train." 

To  this  Eurymachus  :  "  To  heaven  alone 
Refer  the  choice  to  fill  the  vacant  throne. 
Your  patrimonial  stores  in  peace  possess  ; 
Undoubted  all  your  filial  claim  confess  : 
Your  private  right  should  impious  power  invade, 
The  peers  of  Ithaca  would  arm  in  aid. 
But  say,  that  stranger-guest  who  late  withdrew, 
What  and  from  whence  %  his  name  and  lineage  shew. 
His  grave  demeanour,  and  majestic  grace, 
Speak  him  descended  of  no  vulgar  race  : 
Did  he  some  loan  of  ancient  right  require, 
Or  came  forerunner  of  your  sceptred  sire  7" 
u  O  son  of  Polybus  !  (the  prince  replies,) 
JNTo  more  my  sire  will  glad  these  longing  eyes  : 
The  queen's  fond  hope  inventive  rumour  cheers, 
Or  vain  diviners'  dreams  divert  her  fears. 
That  stranger-guest  the  Taphian  realm  obeys, 
A  realm  defended  with  encircling  seas. 


Book  1. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Mentes,  an  ever-honour'd  name,  of  old 
High  in  Ulysses'  social  list  enroll'd." 

Thus  he,  though  conscious  of  th'  etherial  guest, 
Answer'd  evasive  of  the  sly  request. 
Meantime  the  lyre  rejoins  the  sprightly  lay  ; 
Love-dittied  airs,  and  dance,  conclude  the  day. 
But  when  the  star  of  eve,  with  golden  light 
Adorn'd  the  matron-brow  of  sable  night ; 
The  mirthful  train  dispersing  quit  the  court. 
And  to  their  several  domes  to  rest  resort. 
A  towering  structure  to  the  palace  join'd  ; 
To  this  his  steps  the  thoughtful  prince  inclin'd  ; 
In  his  pavilion  there,  to  sleep  repairs  ; 
The  lighted  torch,  the  sage  Euryclea  bears  : 
(Daughter  of  Ops,  the  just  Pisenor's  son, 
For  twenty  beeves  by  great  Laertes  won  ; 
In  rosy  prime  with  charms  attractive  grac'd, 
Honour'd  by  him,  a  gentle  lord  and  chaste, 
With  dear  esteem  :  too  wise,  with  jealous  strife 
To  taint  the  joys  of  sweet  connubial  life. 
Sole  with  Telemachus  her  service  ends, 
A  child  she  nurs'd  him,  and  a  man  attends.) 
Whilst  to  his  couch  himself  the  prince  address'd. 
The  duteous  dame  receiv'd  the  purple  vest : 
The  purple  vest  with  decent  care  dispos'd, 
The  silver  ring  she  pull'd,  the  door  reclos'd; 
The  bolt,  obedient  to  the  silken  cord, 
To  the  strong  staple's  inmost  depth  restor'd, 
Secured  the  valves.    There,  wrapt  in  silent  shade, 
Pensive,  the  rules  the  goddess  gave,  he  weigh'd ; 
Stretch'd  on  the  downy  fleece,  no  rest  he  knows, 
And  in  his  raptur'd  soul  the  vision  glows. 


BOOK  II. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE    COUNCIL    OF  ITHACA. 

TELEMACHUS,  in  the  assembly  of  the  lords  of  Ithaca,  complains* 
of  the  injustice  done  him  by  the  suitors,  and  insists  upon  their 
departure  from  his  palace;  appealing  to  the  princes,  and  ex- 
citing the  people  to  declare  against  them.  The  suitors  endea- 
vour to  justify  their  stay,  at  least  till  he  shall  send  the  queen  to 
the  court  of  lcarius  her  father ;  which  he  refuses.  There  appears 
a  prodigy  of  two  eagles  in  the  sky,  which  an  augur  expounds  to 
the  ruin  of  the  suitors.  Telemachus  then  demands  a  vessel  to 
carry  him  to  Pylos  and  Sparta,  there  to  inquire  of  his  father's  for- 
tunes. Pallas  in  the  shape  of  Mentor  (an  ancient  friend  of  Ulysses) 
helps  him  to  a  ship,  assists  him  in  preparing  necessaries  for  the 
voyage,  and  embarks  with  him  that  night  j  which  concludes  the 
second  day  from  the  opening  of  the  poem. 

The  scene  continues  in  the  palace  of  Ulysses  in  Ithaca. 

Now  reddening  from  the  dawn  the  morning  ray 
Glow'd  in  the  front  of  heaven,  and  gave  the  day. 
The  youthful  hero,  with  returning  light, 
Rose  anxious  from  th'  inquietudes  of  night. 
A  royal  robe  he  wore  with  graceful  pride, 
A  two-edg'd  falchion  threaten'd  by  his  side, 


22 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  2. 


Embroider'd  sandals  glitter'd  as  he  trod, 
And  forth  he  mov'd  majestic  as  a  god. 
Then  by  his  heralds,  restless  of  delay, 
To  council  calls  the  peers  :  the  peers  obey. 
Soon  as  in  solemn  form  th'  assembly  sat, 
From  his  high  dome  himself  descends  in  state. 
Bright  in  his  hand  a  ponderous  javelin  shin'd  ; 
Two  dogs,  a  faithful  guard,  attend  behind ; 
Pallas  with  grace  divine  his  form  improves, 
And  gazing  crowds  admire  him  as  he  moves. 

His  father's  throne  he  fill'd  :  while  distant  stood 
The  hoary  peers,  and  aged  wisdom  bow'd. 

'  Twas  silence  all.    At  last  iEgyptius  spoke  : 
iEgyptius,  by  his  age  and  sorrows  broke ; 
A  length  of  days  his  soul  with  prudence  crown'd, 
A  length  of  days  had  bent  him  to  the  ground. 
His  eldest  hope*  in  arms  to  Ilion  came, 
By  great  Ulysses  taught  the  path  to  fame  ; 
But  (hapless  youth !)  the  hideous  Cyclops  tore 
His  quivering  limbs,  and  quaff 'd  his  spouting  gore. 
Three  sons  remain'd  :  to  climb  with  haughty  fires 
The  royal  bed,  Eurynomus  aspires  ; 
The  rest  with  duteous  love  his  griefs  assuage, 
And  ease  the  sire  of  half  the  cares  of  age. 
Yet  still  his  Antiphus  he  loves,  he  mourns, 
And  as  he  stood,  he  spoke  and  wept  by  turns : 

"  Since  great  Ulysses  sought  the  Phrygrian  plains. 
Within  these  walls  inglorious  silence  reigns. 
Say  then,  ye  peers  !  by  whose  commands  we  meet  ? 
Why  here  once  more  in  solemn  council  sit? 
Ye  young,  ye  old,  the  weighty  cause  disclose  : 
Arrives  some  message  of  invading  foes  1 
Or  say,  does  high  necessity  of  state 


*  Antiphus. 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Inspire  some  patriot,  and  demand  debate : 
The  present  synod  speaks  its  author  wise; 
Assist  him,  Jove,  thou  regent  of  the  skies !" 

He  spoke.    Telemachus  with  transport  glows, 
Embrac'd  the  omen,  and  majestic  rose  ; 
(His  royal  hand  th'  imperial  sceptre  sway'd) 
Then  thus,  addressing  to  iEgyptius,  said  : 

"Reverend  old  man  !  lo  here  confess'd  he  stands 
By  whom  ye  meet :  my  grief  your  care  demands. 
No  story  I  unfold  of  public  woes, 
Nor  bear  advices  of  impending  foes  : 
Peace  the  bless'd  land,  and  joys  incessant  crown  : 
Of  all  this  happy  realm,  I  grieve  alone. 
For  my  lost  sire  continual  sorrows  spring, 
The  great,  the  good  :  your  father,  and  your  king  ! 
Yet  more  ;  our  house  from  its  foundation  bows, 
Our  foes  are  powerful,  and  your  sons  the  foes: 
Hither,  unwelcome  to  the  queen,  they  come  ; 
Why  seek  they  not  the  rich  Icarian  dome  ? 
If  she  must  wed,  from  other  hands  require 
The  dowry  ;  is  Telemachus  her  sire  ^ 
Yet  through  my  court  the  noise  of  revel  rings, 
And  wastes  the  wise  frugality  of  kings. 
Scarce  all  my  herds  their  luxury  suffice; 
Scarce  all  my  wine  their  midnight  hours  supplies. 
Safe  in  my  youth,  in  riot  still  they  grow, 
Nor  in  the  helpless  orphan  dread  a  foe. 
But  come  it  will,  the  time  when  manhood  grants 
More  powerful  advocates  than  vain  complaints. 
Approach  that  hour !  unsufferable  wrong 
Cries  to  the  gods,  and  vengeance  sleeps  too  long. 
Rise  then,  ye  peers !  with  virtuous  anger  rise ; 
Your  fame  revere,  but  most  th'  avenging  skies. 
By  all  the  deathless  powers  that  reign  above, 
By  righteous  Themis  and  by  thundering  Jove, 


24 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  2. 


(Themis,  who  gives  to  councils,  or  denies 

Success;  and  humbles,  or  confirms  the  wise) 

Rise  in  my  aid  !  suffice  the  tears  that  flow 

For  my  lost  sire,  nor  add  new  wo  to  wo. 

If  e'er  he  bore  the  sword  to  strengthen  ill, 

Or  having  power  to  wrong,  betray 'd  the  will, 

On  me,  on  me  your  kindled  wrath  assuage, 

And  bid  the  voice  of  lawless  riot  rage. 

If  ruin  to  our  royal  race  ye  doom, 

Be  you  the  spoilers,  and  our  wealth  consume. 

Then  might  we  hope  redress  from  juster  laws, 

And  raise  all  Ithaca  to  aid  our  cause: 

But  while  your  sons  commit  th'  unpunish'd  wrong, 

You  make  the  arm  of  violence  too  strong." 

While  thus  he  spoke,  with  rage  and  grief  he  frown'd, 
And  dash'd  the5  imperial  sceptre  to  the  ground. 
The  big  round  tear  hung  trembling  in  his  eye ; 
The  synod  gnev'd,  and  gave  a  pitying  sigh, 
Then  silent  sat — at  length  Antinous  burns 
With  haughty  rage,  and  sternly  thus  returns : 

"  O  insolence  of  youth !  whose  tongue  affords 
Such  railing  eloquence,  and  war  of  words. 
Studious  thy  country's  worthies  to  defame, 
Thy  erring  voice  displays  thy  mother's  shame. 
Elusive  of  the  bridal  day,  she  gives 
Fond  hopes  to  all,  and  all  with  hopes  deceives. 
Did  not  the  sun,  through  heaven's  wide  azure  roll'd. 
For  three  long  years  the  royal  fraud  behold  ! 
While  she,  laborious  in  delusion  spread 
The  spacious  loom,  and  mix'd  the  various  thread; 
Where  as  to  life  the  wondrous  figures  rise, 
Thus  spoke  th'  inventive  queen,  with  artful  sighs  : 

'  Tho'  cui<!  in  'eath  Ulysses  breathes  no  more, 
Cease  yet  a  wh "e  to  urge  the  bridal  hour ; 
Cease,  till  to  great  Laertes  1  bequeath 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


25 


A  task  of  grief,  his  ornaments  of  death  : 
Lest  when  the  fates  his  royal  ashes  claim, 
The  Grecian  matrons  taint  my  spotless  fame ; 
When  he,  whom  living  mighty  realms  obey'd, 
Shall  want  in  death  a  shroud  to  grace  his  shade.' 

"  Thus  she  :  at  once  the  generous  train  complies, 
Nor  fraud  mistrusts  in  virtue's  fair  disguise. 
The  work  she  plied  ;  but  studious  of  delay, 
By  night  revers'd  the  labours  of  the  day. 
While  thrice  the  sun  his  annual  journey  made, 
The  conscious  lamp  the  midnight  fraud  survey 'd  ; 
Unheard,  unseen,  three  years  her  arts  prevail ; 
The  fourth,  her  maid  unfolds  th5  amazing  tale. 
We  saw,  as  unperceiv'd  we  took  our  stand, 
The  backward  labours  of  her  faithless  hand. 
Then  urg'd,  she  perfects  her  illustrious  toils; 
A  wondrous  monument  of  female  wiles ! 

"  But  you,  O  peers  !  and  thou,  O  prince!  give  ear; 
(I  speak  aloud,  that  every  Greek  may  hear) 
Dismiss  the  queen ;  and  if  her  sire  approves, 
Let  him  espouse  her  to  the  peer  she  loves : 
Bid  instant  to  prepare  the  bridal  train, 
Nor  let  a  race  of  princes  wait  in  vain. 
Though  with  a  grace  divine  her  soul  is  bless'd, 
And  all  Minerva  breathes  within  her  breast, 
In  wondrous  arts  than  woman  more  renown'd, 
And  more  than  woman  with  deep  wisdom  crown'd; 
Though  Tyro  nor  Mycene  match  her  name, 
Nor  great  Alcmena  (the  proud  boasts  of  fame,) 
Yet  thus  by  heaven  adorn'd,  by  heaven's  decree 
She  shines  with  fatal  excellence,  to  thee : 
With  thee,  the  bowl  we  drain,  indulge  the  feast,  . 
Till  righteous  heaven  reclaim  her  stubborn  breast. 
What  though  from  pole  to  pole  resounds  her  name  I 
The  son's  destruction  waits  the  mother's  fame : 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  2. 


For  till  she  leaves  thy  court,  it  is  decreed, 
Thy  bowl  to  empty,  and  thy  flock  to  bleed.'7 

While  yet  he  speaks,  Telemachus  replies : 
tc  E'en  nature  starts,  and  what  ye  ask  denies. 
Thus,  shall  I  thus  repay  a  mother's  cares, 
Who  gave  me  life,  and  nurs'd  my  infant  years  ? 
While  sad  on  foreign  shores  Ulysses  treads, 
Or  glides  a  ghost  with  unapparent  shades; 
How  to  Icarius  in  the  bridal  hour 
Shall  I,  by  waste  undone,  refund  the  dow'r  ? 
How  from  my  father  should  I  vengeance  dread ; 
How  would  my  mother  curse  my  hated  head  1 
And  while  in  wrath  to  vengeful  fiends  she  cries, 
How  from  their  hell  would  vengeful  fiends  arise  1 
Abhorr'd  by  all,  accurs'd  my  name  would  grow, 
The  earth's  disgrace,  and  human-kind  my  foe. 
If  this  displease,  why  urge  ye  here  your  stay  ? 
Haste  from  the  court,  ye  spoilers,  haste  away : 
Waste  in  wild  riot  what  your  land  allows, 
There  ply  the  early  feast,  and  late  carouse. 
But  if,  to  honour  lost,  'tis  still  decreed 
For  you  my  bowl  shall  flow,  my  flocks  shall  bleed ; 
Judge  and  assert  my  right,  impartial  Jove  ! 
By  him,  and  all  the'  immortal  host  above, 
(A  sacred  oath)  if  heaven  the  power  supply, 
Vengeance  I  vow,  and  for  your  wrongs  ye  die." 

With  that,  two  eagles  from  a  mountain's  height 
By  Jove's  command  direct  their  rapid  flight ; 
Swift  they  descend,  with  wing  to  wing  conjoin'd, 
Stretch  their  broad  plumes,  and  float  upon  the  wind. 
Above  th'  assembled  peers  they  wheel  on  high, 
And  clang  their  wings,  and  hovering  beat  the  sky; 
With  ardent  eyes  the  rival  train  they  threat, 
And  shrieking  loud,  denounce  approaching  fate. 
They  cuff,  they  tear,  their  cheeks  and  neck  they  rend, 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


27 


And  from  their  plumes  huge  drops  of  blood  descend  : 
Then  sailing  o'er  the  domes  and  towers,  they  fly 
Full  toward  the  east,  and  mount  into  the  sky. 
TThe  wondering  rivals  gaze  with  cares  oppress'd, 
And  chilling  horrors  freeze  in  every  breast. 
Till  big  with  knowledge  of  approaching  woes 
The  prince  of  augurs,  Halitherses,  rose : 
Prescient  he  view'd  th'  aerial  tracks,  and  drew 
A  sure  presage  from  every  wing  that  flew. 

M  Ye  sons  (he  cried)  of  Ithaca,  give  ear, 
Hear  all !  but  chiefly  you,  O  rivals  !  hear. 
Destruction  sure  o'er  all  your  heads  impends ; 
Ulysses  comes,  and  death  his  steps  attends. 
Nor  to  the  great  alone  is  death  decreed  ; 
We,  and  our  guilty  Ithaca,  must  bleed. 
Why  cease  we  then  the  wrath  of  heaven  to  stay  1 
Be  humbled  all,  and  lead,  ye  great !  the  way. 
For  lo  !  my  words  no  fancied  woes  relate : 
I  speak  from  science,  and  the  voice  is  fate. 

11  When  great  Ulysses  sought  the  Phrygian  shores 
To  shake  with  war  proud  Ilion's  lofty  towers, 
Deeds  then  undone  my  faithful  tongue  foretold  : 
Heaven  seal'd  my  words,  and  you  those  deeds  behold. 
I  see  (I  cried)  his  woes,  a  countless  train ; 
I  see  his  friends  o'erwhelm'd  beneath  the  main ! 
How  twice  ten  years  from  shore  to  shore  he  roams : 
Now  twice  ten  years  are  past,  and  now  he  comes !" 

To  whom  Eurymachus  :  "  Fly,  dotard,  fly  ! 
With  thy  wise  dreams,  and  fables  of  the  sky. 
Go,  prophesy  at  home  ;  thy  sons  advise  : 
Here  thou  art  sage  in  vain — I  better  read  the  skies. 
Unnumber'd  birds  glide  through  th'  aerial  way, 
Vagrants  of  air,  and  unforeboding  stray. 
Cold  in  the  tomb,  or  in  the  deeps  below, 
Ulysses  lies :  O  wert  thou  laid  as  low  1 


28 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  2. 


Then  would  that  busy  head  no  broils  suggest, 

Nor  fire  to  rage  Telemachus's  breast. 

From  him  some  bribe  thy  venal  tongue  requires, 

And  interest,  not  the  god,  thy  voice  inspires. 

His  guileless  youth,  if  thy  experienc'd  age 

Mislead  fallacious  into  idle  rage, 

Vengeance  deserv'd  thy  malice  shall  repress, 

And  but  augment  the  wrongs  thou  would'st  redress. 

Telemachus  may  bid  the  queen  repair 

To  great  Icarius,  whose  paternal  care 

Will  guide  her  passion,  and  reward  her  choice 

With  wealthy  dower,  and  bridal  gifts  of  price. 

Till  she  retires,  determin'd  we  remain, 

And  both  the  prince  and  augur  threat  in  vain  : 

His  pride  of  words,  and  thy  wild  dream  of  fate, 

Move  not  the  brave,  or  only  move  their  hate. 

Threat  on,  O  prince !  elude  the  bridal  day, 

Threat  on,  till  all  thy  stores  in  waste  decay. 

True,  Greece  affords  a  train  of  lovely  dames, 

In  wealth  and  beauty  worthy  of  our  flames: 

But  never  from  this  nobler  suit  we  cease ; 

For  wealth  and  beauty  less  than  virtue  please." 

To  whom  the  youth  ;  "  Since  then  in  vain  I  tell 
My  numerous  woes,  in  silence  let  them  dwell. 
But  heaven,  and  all  the  Greeks,  have  heard  my  wrongs : 
To  heaven,  and  all  the  Greeks,  redress  belongs. 
Yet  this  I  ask — nor  be  it  ask'd  in  vain — 
A  bark  to  waft  me  o'er  the  rolling  main ; 
The  realms  of  Pyle  and  Sparta  to  explore, 
And  seek  my  royal  sire  from  shore  to  shore  : 
If,  or  to  fame  his  doubtful  fate  be  known, 
Or  to  be  learn' d  from  oracles  alone  ? 
If  yet  he  lives,  with  patience  I  forbear 
Till  the  fleet  hours  restore  the  circling  year : 
But  if  already  wandering  in  the  train 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


29 


Of  empty  shades,  I  measure  back  the  main, 
Plant  the  fair  column  o'er  the  mighty  dead, 
And  yield  his  consort  to  the  nuptial  bed." 

He  ceas'd  ;  and  while  abashed  the  peers  attend, 
Mentor  arose,  Ulysses'  faithful  friend  : 
[When  fierce  in  arms  he  sought  the  scenes  of  war, 
"  My  friend  (he  cried)  my  palace  be  thy  care ; 
Years  roll'd  on  years  my  godlike  sire  decay, 
Guard  thou  his  age,  and  his  bequests  obey."] 
Stern  as  he  rose,  he  cast  his  eyes  around, 
That  flash'd  with  rage :  and,  as  he  spoke,  he  frown'd : 

"  O  never,  never  more  let  king  be  just, 
Be  mild  in  power,  or  faithful  to  his  trust ! 
Let  tyrants  govern  with  an  iron  rod, 
Oppress,  destroy,  and  be  the  scourge  of  God  ; 
Since  he  who  like  a  father  held  his  reign, 
So  soon  forgot,  was  just  and  mild  in  vain  ! 
True,  while  my  friend  is  griev'd,  his  griefs  I  share  ; 
Yet  now  the  rivals  are  my  smallest  care  : 
They,  for  the  mighty  mischiefs  they  devise, 
Ere  long  shall  pay — their  forfeit  lives  the  price. 
But  against  you,  ye  Greeks !  ye  coward  train, 
Gods  !  how  my  soul  is  mov'd  with  just  disdain  ! 
Dumb  ye  all  stand,  and  not  one  tongue  affords 
His  injur'd  prince  the  little  aid  of  words." 

While  yet  he  spoke,  Leocritus  rejoin'd  : 
"  O  pride  of  words,  and  arrogance  of  mind  ! 
Would'st  thou  to  rise  in  arms  the  Greeks  advise  1 
Join  all  your  powers !  in  arms,  ye  Greeks,  arise  ! 
Yet  would  your  powers  in  vain  our  strength  oppose  j 
The  valiant  few  o'ermatch  an  host  of  foes. 
Should  great  Ulysses  stem  appear  in  arms, 
While  the  bowl  circles,  and  the  banquet  warms  ; 
Though  to  his  breast  his  spouse  with  transport  flies, 
Torn  from  her  breast,  that  hour,  Ulysses  dies. 


30 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  2. 


But  hence  retreating  to  your  domes  repair; 
To  arm  the  vessel,  Mentor  !  be  thy  care, 
And,  Halitherses !  thine  :  be  each  his  friend  ; 
Ye  lov'd  the  father:  go,  the  son  attend, 
But,  yet,  I  trust  the  boaster  means  to  stay 
Safe  in  the  court,  nor  tempt  the  wat'ry  way." 

Then  with  a  rushing  sound,  th'  assembly  bend, 
Diverse  their  steps:  the  rival  rout  ascend 
The  royal  dome  ;  whilst  sad  the  prince  explores 
The  neighbouring  main,  and  sorrowing  treads  the  shores. 
There,  as  the  waters  o'er  his  hands  he  shed, 
The  royal  suppliant  to  Minerva  pray'd : 

"  O  goddess  !  who  descending  from  the  skies 
Vouchsaf  5d  thy  presence  to  my  wondering  eyes  ; 
By  whose  commands  the  raging  deeps  I  trace, 
And  seek  my  sire  through  storms  and  rolling  seas  ! 
Hear  from  thy  heavens  above,  O  warrior-maid  ! 
Descend  once  more,  propitious  to  my  aid. 
Without  thy  presence,  vain  is  thy  command ; 
Greece,  and  the  rival  train,  thy  voice  withstand." 

Indulgent  to  his  prayer,  the  goddess  took 
Sage  Mentor's  form,  and  thus  like  Mentor  spoke  : 

"  O  prince  !  in  early  youth  divinely  wise, 
Born,  the  Ulysses  of  thy  age  to  rise  ! 
If  to  the  son  the  father's  worth  descends, 
O'er  the  wide  waves  success  thy  ways  attends  ; 
To  tread  the  walks  of  death  he  stood  prepar'd, 
And  what  he  greatly  thought,  he  nobly  dar'd. 
Were  not  wise  sons  descendant  of  the  wise, 
And  did  not  heroes  from  brave  heroes  rise  ; 
Vain  were  my  hopes  :  few  sons  attain  the  praise 
Of  their  great  sires,  and  most  their  sires  disgrace. 
But  since  thy  veins  paternal  virtue  fires, 
And  all  Penelope  thy  soul  inspires, 
Go,  and  succeed !  the  rivals'  aims  despise ; 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


31 


For  never,  never,  wicked  man  was  wise. 
Blind  they  rejoice,  though  now,  e'en  now  they  fall ; 
Death  hastes  amain  :  one  hour,  o'erwhelms  them  all. 
And  lo,  with  speed  we  plough  the  wat'ry  way  ; 
My  power  shall  guard  thee,  and  my  hand  convey  : 
The  winged  vessel  studious  1  prepare, 
Through  seas  and  realms  companion  of  thy  care. 
Thou  to  the  court  ascend  ;  and  to  the  shores, 
When  night  advances,  bear  the  naval  stores  : 
Bread,  that  decaying  man  with  strength  supplies, 
And  generous  wine  which  thoughtful  sorrow  flies. 
Meanwhile  the  mariners  by  my  command 
Shall  speed  abroad,  a  valiant  chosen  band. 
Wide  o'er  the  bay,  by  vessel  vessel  rides  ; 
The  best  I  choose  to  waft  thee  o'er  the  tides." 
She  spoke  :  to  his  high  dome  the  prince  returns, 
And  as  he  moves,  with  royal  anguish  mourns. 
'Twas  riot  all,  among  the  lawless  train ; 
Boar  bled  by  boar,  and  goat  by  goat  lay  slain. 
Arriv'd,  his  hand  the  gay  Antinous  press'd, 
And  thus  deriding,  with  a  smile  address'd  : 

"  Grieve  not,  O  daring  prince  !  that  noble  heart ; 
111  suits  gay  youth  the  stern  heroic  part. 
Indulge  the  genial  hour  ;  unbend  thy  soul ; 
Leave  thought  to  age,  and  drain  the  flowing  bowl. 
Studious  to  ease  thy  grief,  our  care  provides 
The  bark,  to  waft  thee  o'er  the  swelling  tides." 

u  Is  this  (returns  the  prince)  for  mirth  a  time  7 
When  lawless  gluttons  riot,  mirth's  a  crime ; 
The  luscious  wines,  dishonour'd,  lose  their  taste; 
The  song  is  noise,  and  impious  is  the  feast. 
Suffice  it  to  have  spent  with  swift  decay 
The  wealth  of  kings,  and  made  my  youth  a  prey. 
But  now  the  wise  instructions  of  the  sage, 
And  manly  thoughts  inspir'd  by  manly  age, 


32 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book 


Teach  me  to  seek  redress  for  all  my  wo, 

Here,  or  in  Pyle — in  Pyle,  or  here,  your  foe. 

Deny  your  vessels,  ye  deny  in  vain ; 

A  private  voyager  1  pass  the  main. 

Free  breathe  the  winds,  and  free  the  billows  flow, 

And  where  on  earth  I  live,  I  live  your  foe." 

He  spoke  and  frown'd,  nor  longer  deign'd  to  stay 
Sternly  his  hand  withdrew,  and  strode  away. 
Meantime,  o'er  all  the  dome,  they  quaff,  they  feast, 
Derisive  taunts  were  spread  from  guest  to  guest, 
And  each  in  jovial  mood  his  mate  address'd. 

"  Tremble  ye  not,  O  friends !  and  coward  fly, 
Doom'd  by  the  stern  Telemachus  to  die  1 
To  Pyle  or  Sparta  to  demand  supplies, 
Big  with  revenge,  the  mighty  warrior  flies : 
Or  comes  from  Ephyre  with  poisons  fraught, 
And  kills  us  all  in  one  tremendous  draught!  " 

"  Or  who  can  say  (his  gamesome  mate  replies) 
But  while  the  dangers  of  the  deeps  he  tries, 
He,  like  his  sire,  may  sink  depriv'd  of  breath, 
And  punish  us  unkindly  by  his  death  ? 
What  mighty  labours  would  he  then  create, 
To  seize  his  treasures,  and  divide  his  state, 
The  royal  palace  to  the  queen  convey, 
Or  him  she  blesses  in  the  bridal  day !'' 

Meantime  the  lofty  rooms  the  prince  surveys, 
Where  lay  the  treasures  of  th'  Ithacian  race  : 
Here  ruddy  brass  and  gold  refulgent  blaz'd  ; 
There  polish'd  chests  embroider'd  vestures  grac'd  ; 
Here  jars  of  oil  breath'd  forth  a  rich  perfume; 
There  casks  of  wine  in  rows  adorn'd  the  dome. 
(Pure  flavorous  wine,  by  gods  in  bounty  given, 
And  worthy  to  exalt  the  feasts  of  heaven) 
Untouch'd  they  stood,  till,  his  long  labours  o'er, 
The  great  Ulysses  reach'd  his  native  shore. 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


33 


A  double  strength  of  bars  secur'd  the  gates  : 
Fast  by  the  door  the  wise  Euryclea  waits  : 
Euryclea,  who,  great  Ops  !  thy  lineage  shar'd, 
And  watch'd  all  night,  all  day;  a  faithful  guard. 

To  whom  the  prince  ;  "  O  thou,  whose  guardian  care 
Nurs'd  the  most  wretched  king  that  breathes  the  air : 
Untouch' d  and  sacred  may  these  vessels  stand 
Till  great  Ulysses  views  his  native  land. 
But  by  thy  care  twelve  urns  of  wine  be  flll'd, 
Next  these  in  worth,  and  firm  those  urns  be  seal'd, 
And  twice  ten  measures  of  the  choicest  flour 
Prepar'd,  ere  yet  descends  the  evening  hour. 
For  when  the  favouring  shades  of  night  arise, 
And  peaceful  slumbers  close  my  mother's  eyes, 
Me  from  our  coast  shall  spreading  sails  convey, 
To  seek  Ulysses  through  the  watery  way." 

While  yet  he  spoke,  she  fill'd  the  walls  with  cries, 
And  tears  ran  trickling  from  her  aged  eyes. 
"  O  whither,  whither  flies  my  son  V}  she  cried, 
11  To  realms  that  rocks  and  roaring  seas  divide'? 
In  foreign  lands  thy  father's  days  deeay'd, 
And  foreign  lands  contain  the  mighty  dead. 
The  watery  way  ill-fated  if  thou  try, 
All,  all  must  perish,  and  by  fraud  you  die ! 
Then  stay,  my  child !  storms  beat,  and  rolls  the  main ; 
O  beat  those  storms,  and  roll  the  seas  in  vain 

"  Far  hence  (replied  the  prince)  thy  fears  be  driven ; 
Heaven  calls  me  forth  ;  these  councils  are  of  heaven. 
But  by  the  powers  that  hate  the  perjur'd,  swear 
To  keep  my  voyage  from  the  royal  ear, 
Nor  uncompell'd  the  dangerous  truth  betray, 
Till  twice  six  times  descends  the  lamp  of  day ; 
Lest  the  sad  tale  a  mother's  life  impair, 
And  grief  destroy  what  time  awhile  would  spare. 

Thus  he.    The  matron  with  uplifted  eyes 

C 


34 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  2. 


Attests  th'  all-seeing  sovereign  of  the  skies. 
Then  studious  she  prepares  the  choicest  flour, 
The  strength  of  wheat,  and  wines  an  ample  store  : 
"While  to  the  rival  train  the  prince  returns, 
The  martial  goddess  with  impatience  burns ; 
Like  thee,  Telemachus,  in  voice  and  size, 
With  speed  divine  from  street  to  street  she  flies, 
She  bids  the  mariners  prepar'd  to  stand, 
When  night  descends,  embodied  on  the  strand. 
Then  to  Noemon  swift  she  runs,  she  flies, 
And  asks  a  bark  s  the  chief  a  bark  supplies. 

And  now,  declining  with  his  sloping  wheels, 
Down  sunk  the  sun  behind  the  western  hills. 
The  goddess  shov'd  the  vessel  from  the  shores, 
And  stow'd  within  its  womb  the  naval  stores. 
Full  in  the  openings  of  the  spacious  main 
It  rides :  and  now  descends  the  sailor-train. 

Next,  to  the  court,  impatient  of  delay 
With  rapid  step  the  goddess  urg'd  her  way  : 
There  every  eye  with  slumb'rous  chains  she  bound, 
And  dash'd  the  flowing  goblet  to  the  ground. 
Drowsy  they  rose,  with  heavy  fumes  oppress'd, 
Reel'd  from  the  palace,  and  retir'd  to  rest. 

Then  thus,  in  Mentor's  reverend  form  array'd, 
Spoke  to  Telemachus  the  martial  maid  : 
<{  Lo !  on  the  seas  prepar'd  the  vessel  stands, 
Th'  impatient  mariner  thy  speed  demands." 
Swift  as  she  spoke,  with  rapid  pace  she  leads  ; 
The  footsteps  of  the  deity  he  treads. 
Swift  to  the  shore  they  move  :  along  the  strand 
The  ready  vessel  rides,  the  sailors  ready  stand. 

He  bids  them  bring  their  stores ;  th'  attending  train 
Load  the  tall  bark,  and  launch  into  the  main. 
The  prince  and  goddess  to  the  stern  ascend  ; 
To  the  strong  stroke  at  once  the  rowers  bend . 


Book  2. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Full  from  the  west  she  bids  fresh  breezes  blow  ; 
The  sable  billows  foam  and  roar  below. 
The  chief  his  orders  gives  :  th'  obedient  band 
With  due  observance  wait  the  chief's  command  ; 
With  speed  the  mast  they  rear,  with  speed  unbind 
The  spacious  sheet,  and  stretch  it  to  the  wind. 
High  o'er  the  roaring  waves  the  spreading  sails 
Bow  the  tall  mast,  and  swell  before  the  gales  ; 
The  crooked  keel  the  parting  surge  divides, 
And  to  the  stern  retreating  roll  the  tides. 
And  now  they  ship  their  oars,  and  crown  with  wine 
The  holy  goblet  to  the  powers  divine  : 
Imploring  all  the  gods  that  reign  above, 
But  chief  the  blue-ey'd  progeny  of  Jove. 

Thus  all  the  night  they  stem  the  liquid  way, 
And  end  their  voyage  with  the  morning  ray. 


BOOK  III. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE  INTERVIEW  OF  TELEMACHUS  AND  NESTOR. 

TELEMACHUS,  guided  by  Palias  in  the  shape  of  Mentor,  arrives  in 
the  morning  at  Pylos,  where  Nestor  and  his  sons  are  sacrificing 
on  the  sea-shore  to  Neptune.  Telemachus  declares  the  occasion 
of  his  coming ;  and  Nestor  relates  what  passed  in  their  return 
from  Troy  how  their  fleets  were  separated,  and  he  never  since 
heard  of  Ulysses.  The  discourse  concerning  the  death  of  Aga- 
memnon, the  revenge  of  Orestes,  and  the  injuries  of  the  suitors. 
Nestor  advises  him  to  go  to  Sparta,  and  inquire  further  of  Mene- 
laus.  The  sacrifice  ending  with  the  night,  Minerva  vanishes 
from  them  in  the  form  of  an  eagle:  Telemachus  is  lodged  in  the 
palace.  The  next  morning  they  sacrifice  a  bullock  to  Minerva, 
and  Telemachus  proceeds  on  his  journey  to  Sparta,  attended  by 
Pisistratus. 

The  scene  lies  on  the  sea-shore  of  Pylos. 

The  sacred  sun,  above  the  waters  rais'd, 
Through  heaven's  eternal  brazen  portals  blaz'd  3 
And  wide  o'er  earth  diffus'd  his  cheering  ray, 
To  gods  and  men  to  give  the  golden  day. 
Now  on  the  coast  of  Pyle  the  vessel  falls. 
Before  old  Neleus'  venerable  walls. 


38 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  3. 


There,  suppliant  to  the  monarch  of  the  flood, 
At  nine  green  theatres  the  Pylians  stood ; 
Each  held  five  hundred  (a  deputed  train,) 
At  each,  nine  oxen  on  the  sand  lay  slain. 
They  taste  the  entrails,  and  the  altars  load 
"With  smoking  thighs,  an  offering  to  the  god. 
Full  for  the  port  the  Ithacensians  stand, 
And  furl  their  sails,  and  issue  on  the  land. 
Telemachus  already  press'd  the  shore  ; 
Not  first,  the  power  of  wisdom  march'd  before, 
And  ere  the  sacificing  throng  he  join'd, 
Admonish'd  thus  his  well  attending  mind : 

u  Proceed,  my  son  !  this  youthful  shame  expel ; 
An  honest  business  never  blush  to  tell. 
To  learn  what  fates  thy  wretched  sire  detain, 
We  past  the  wide  immeasurable  main. 
Meet  then  the  senior,  far  renown'd  for  sense, 
With  reveren'd  awe,  but  decent  confidence : 
Urge  him  with  truth  to  frame  his  fair  replies  ; 
And  sure  he  will,  for  wisdom  never  lies." 

£<  O  tell  me,  Mentor!  tell  me,  faithful  guide, 
(The  youth  with  prudent  modesty  replied) 
How  shall  I  meet,  or  how  accost  the  sage, 
Unskill'd  in  speech,  nor  yet  mature  of  age  ; 
Awful  th'  approach,  and  hard  the  task  appears, 
To  question  wisely  men  of  riper  years." 

To  whom  the  martial  goddess  thus  rejoin'd  : 
(t  Search,  for  some  thoughts,  thy  own  suggesting  mind  ; 
And  others  dictated  by  heavenly  power 
Shall  rise  spontaneous  in  the  needful  hour  : 
For  nought  un prosperous  shall  thy  ways  attend, 
Born  with  good  omens,  and  with  heaven  thy  friend.51 

She  spoke,  and  led  the  way  with  swifter  speed : 
As  swift,  the  youth  pursued  the  way  she  led  j 
And  join'd  the  band  before  the  sacred  fire, 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Where  sat,  encompass'd  with  his  sons,  the  sire. 

The  youth  of  Pylos,  some  on  pointed  wood 

Transfix 'd  the  fragments,  some  prepar'd  the  food. 

In  friendly  throngs  they  gather,  to  embrace 

Their  unknown  guests,  and  at  the  banquet  place. 

Pisistratus  was  first  to  grasp  their  hands, 

And  spread  soft  hides  upon  the  yellow  sands : 

Along  the  shore  th'  illustrious  pair  he  led, 

Where  Nestor  sat  with  youthful  Thrasymed. 

To  each  a  portion  of  the  feast  he  bore, 

And  held  a  golden  goblet  foaming  o'er ; 

Then  first  approaching  to  the  elder  guest, 

The  latent  goddess  in  these  words  address'd : 

"  Whoe'er  thou  art,  whom  fortune  brings  to  keep 

These  rites  of  Neptune,  monarch  of  the  deep, 

The  first  it  fits,  O  stranger !  to  prepare 

The  due  libation  and  the  solemn  pray'r; 

Then  give  thy  friend  to  shed  the  sacred  wine  : 

Though  much  thy  younger,  and  his  years  like  mine, 

He  too,  I  deem,  implores  the  powers  divine  : 

For  all  mankind  alike  require  their  grace, 

All  born  to  want ;  a  miserable  race  !" 

He  spake,  and  to  her  hand  preferr'd  the  bowl : 
A  secret  pleasure  touch'd  Athena's  soul, 
To  see  the  preference  due  to  sacred  age 
Regarded  ever  by  the  just  and  sage. 
Of  ocean's  king  she  then  implores  the  grace. 
"  O  thou !  whose  arms  this  ample  globe  embrace, 
Fulfil  our  wish,  and  let  thy  glory  shine 
On  Nestor  first,  and  Nestor's  royal  line  ; 
Next  grant  the  Pylian  states  their  just  desires, 
Pleas'd  with  their  hecatomb's  ascending  fires  j 
Last,  deign  Telemachus  and  me  to  bless, 
And  crown  our  voyage  with  desir'd  success.'* 


40 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  3. 


Thus  she ;  and  having  paid  the  rite  divine, 
Gave  to  Ulysses'  son  the  rosy  wine. 
Suppliant  he  pray'd.    And  now  the  victims  dress'd 
They  draw,  divide,  and  celehrate  the  feast. 
The  banquet  done,  the  narrative  old  man, 
Thus  mild,  the  pleasing  conference  began : 

"Now,  gentle  guests!  the  genial  banquet  o'er, 
It  fits  to  ask  ye,  what  your  native  shore, 
And  whence  your  race?  on  what  adventure,  say, 
Thus  far  ye  wander  through  the  watery  way  % 
Relate,  if  business,  or  the  thirst  of  gain, 
Engage  your  journey  o'er  the  pathless  main  : 
Where  savage  pirates  seek  through  seas  unknown 
The  lives  of  others,  venturous  of  their  own." 

Urg'd  by  the  precepts  by  the  goddess  given, 
And  iill'd  with  confidence  infus'd  from  heaven, 
The  youth,  whom  Pallas  destin'd  to  be  wise 
And  fam'd  among  the  sons  of  men,  replies : 
"  Inquir'st  thou,  father!  from  what  coast  we  came  ? 
(O  grace  and  glory  of  the  Grecian  name!) 
From  where  high  Ithaca  o'erlooks  the  floods, 
Brown  with  o'er-arching  shades  and  pendent  woods. 
Us  to  these  shores  our  filial  duty  draws, 
A  private  sorrow,  not  a  public  cause. 
My  sire  I  seek,  where'er  the  voice  of  fame 
Has  told  the  glories  of  his  noble  name, 
The  great  Ulysses,  fam'd  from  shore  to  shore 
For  valour  much,  for  hardy  suffering  more. 
Long  time  with  thee  before  proud  llion's  wall 
In  arms  he  fought ;  with  thee  beheld  her  fall. 
Of  all  the  chiefs,  this  hero's  fate  alone 
Has  Jove  reserv'd,  unheard  of,  and  unknown; 
Whether  in  fields  by  hostile  fury  slain, 
Or  sunk  by  tempests  in  the  gulfy  main  \ 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Of  this  to  learn,  oppress'd  with  tender  fears, 
Lo,  at  thy  knee  his  suppliant  son  appears. 
If  or  thy  certain  eye,  or  curious  ear, 
Have  learnt  his  fate,  the  whole  dark  story  clear : 
And  oh  !  whate'er  heaven  destin'd  to  betide, 
Let  neither  flattery  smooth,  nor  pity  hide. 
Prepar'd  1  stand  :  he  was  but  born  to  try 
The  lot  of  man;  to  sutler  and  to  die. 
O  then,  if  ever  through  the  ten  years'  war 
The  wise,  the  good  Ulysses  claim'd  thy  care ; 
If  e'er  he  join'd  thy  council  or  thy  sword, 
True  in  his  deed,  and  constant  to  his  word ; 
Far  as  thy  mind  through  backward  time  can  see. 
Search  all  thy  stores  of  faithful  memory  ; 
rTis  sacred  truth  I  ask,  and  ask  of  thee." 

To  him  experiene'd  Nestor  thus  rejoin'd : 
"  O  friend  !  what  sorrows  dost  thou  bring  to  mind 
Shall  I  the  long,  laborious  scene  review, 
And  open  all  the  wounds  of  Greece  anew? 
What  toils  by  sea  !  where  dark  in  quest  of  prey 
Dauntless  we  rov'd  ;  Achilles  led  the  way : 
What  toils  by  land  !  where  mixt  in  fatal  fight 
Such  numbers  fell,  such  heroes  sunk  to  night: 
There  Ajax  great,  Achilles  there  the  brave, 
There  wise  Patroclus,  fill  an  early  grave : 
There  too  my  son — ah !  once  my  best  delight, 
Once  swift  of  foot,  and  terrible  in  fight, 
In  whom  stern  courage  with  soft  virtue  join'd, 
A  faultless  body,  and  a  blameless  mind  : 
Antilochus — what  more  can  I  relate  % 
How  trace  the  tedious  series  of  our  fate  % 
JNot  added  years  on  years  my  task  could  close, 
The  long  historian  of  my  country's  woes: 
Back  to  thy  native  islands  might'st  thou  sailj 
And  leave  half-heard  the  melancholy  tale* 


42 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  3. 


Nine  painful  years  on  that  detested  shore, 
What  stratagems  we  form'd,  what  toils  we  bore  ! 
Still  labouring  on,  till  scarce  at  last  we  found 
Great  Jove  propitious,  and  our  conquest  crown'd. 
Far  o'er  the  rest,  thy  mighty  father  shin'd, 
In  wit,  in  prudence,  and  in  force  of  mind. 
Art  thou  the  son  of  that  illustrious  sire  ? 
With  joy  I  grasp  thee,  and  with  love  admire. 
So  like  your  voices,  and  your  words  so  wise, 
Who  finds  thee  younger  must  consult  his  eyes. 
Thy  sire  and  I  were  one  :  nor  varied  aught 
In  public  sentence,  or  in  private  thought ; 
Alike  to  council  or  th'  assembly  came, 
With  equal  souls  and  sentiments  the  same. 
But  when  (by  wisdom  won)  proud  Ilion  burn'd, 
And  in  their  ships  the  conquering  Greeks  return'd  ; 
5Twas  God's  high  will  the  victors  to  divide, 
And  turn  th'  event,  confounding  human  pride : 
Some  he  destroy'd,  some  scatter'd  as  the  dust  \ 
(Not  all  were  prudent,  and  not  all  were  just) 
Then  Discord,  sent  by  Pallas  from  above, 
Stern  daughter  of  the  great  avenger  Jove, 
The  brother-kings  inspir'd  with  fell  debate  ; 
Who  call'd  to  council  all  th'  Achaian  state, 
But  call'd  untimely  (not  the  sacred  rite 
Observ'd,  nor  heedful  of  the  setting  light, 
Nor  herald  sworn  the  session  to  proclaim :) 
Sour  with  debauch,  a  reeling  tribe  they  came, 
To  these  the  cause  of  meeting  they  explain, 
And  Menelaiis  moves  to  cross  the  main ; 
Not  so  the  king  of  men  :  he  will'd  to  stay  ; 
The  sacred  rites  and  hecatombs  to  pay, 
And  calm  Minerva's  wrath.    Oh,  blind  to  fate  ! 
The  gods  not  lightly  change  their  love,  or  hate. 
With  ireful  taunts  eacl}  other  they  oppose9 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY, 


Till  in  loud  tumult  all  the  Greeks  arose. 

Now  different  counsels  every  breast  divide, 

Each  burns  with  rancour  to  the  adverse  side: 

Th'  unquiet  night  strange  projects  entertain'd 

(So  Jove,  that  urg'd  us  to  our  fate  ordain'd.) 

We  with  the  rising  morn  our  ships  unmoor'd, 

And  brought  our  captives  and  our  stores  aboard ; 

But  half  the  people  with  respect  obey'd 

The  king  of  men,  and  at  his  bidding  stay'd. 

Now  on  the  wings  of  winds  our  course  we  keep, 

(For  God  had  smooth'd  the  waters  of  the  deep) 

For  Tenedos  we  spread  our  eager  oars, 

There  land,  and  pay  due  victims  to  the  powers; 

To  bless  our  safe  return  we  join  in  pray'r, 

But  angry  Jove  dispers'd  our  vows  in  air, 

And  rais'd  new  discord.    Then  (so  heaven  decreed) 

Ulysses  first  and  Nestor  disagreed : 

Wise  as  he  was,  by  various  counsels  sway'd, 

He  there,  though  late,  to  please  the  monarch,  stay'd. 

But  1,  determin'd  stem  the  foamy  floods, 

Warn'd  of  the  coming  fury  of  the  gods. 

With  us,  Tydides  fear'd,  and  urg'd  his  haste : 

And  Menelaiis  came,  but  came  the  last. 

He  join'd  our  vessels  in  the  Lesbian  bay, 

While  yet  we  doubted  of  our  watery  way; 

If  to  the  right  to  urge  the  pilot's  toil, 

(The  safer  road)  beside  the  Psyrian  isle; 

Or  the  straight  course  to  rocky  Chios  plough, 

And  anchor  under  Mimas'  shaggy  brow. 

We  sought  direction  of  the  power  divine : 

The  god  propitious  gave  the  guiding  sign  ; 

Through  the  mid  seas  he  bid  our  navy  steer, 

And  in  Euboea  shun  the  woes  we  fear. 

The  whistling  winds  already  wak'd  the  sky  j 

Before  the  whistling  winds  the  vessels  fly> 


41 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book 


With  rapid  swiftness  cut  the  liquid  way, 
And  reach  Gerestus  at  the  point  of  day. 
There  hecatombs  of  bulls,  to  Neptune  slain. 
High-flaming  please  the  monarch  of  the  main. 
The  fourth  day  shone,  when  all  their  labours  o'er 
Tydides'  vessels  touch'd  the  wish'd-for  shore : 
But  1  to  Pylos  scud  before  the  gales, 
The  god  still  breathing  on  my  swelling  sails; 
Separate  from  all,  I  safely  landed  here ; 
Their  fates  or  fortunes  never  reach' d  my  ear. 
Yet  what  I  learn'd,  attend ;  as  here  I  sat,  } 
And  ask'd  each  voyager  each  hero's  fate ;  > 
Curious  to  know,  and  willing  to  relate.  J 

"  Safe  reach'd  the  Myrmidons  their  native  land, 
Beneath  Achilles'  warlike  son's  command. 
Those,  whom  the  heir  of  great  Apollo's  art, 
Brave  Philoctetes,  taught  to  wing  the  dart ; 
And  those  whom  Idomen  from  llion's  plain 
Had  led,  securely  cross'd  the  dreadful  main. 
How  Agamemnon  touch'd  his  Argive  coast, 
And  how  his  life  by  fraud  and  force  he  lost, 
And  how  the  murderer  paid  his  forfeit  breath ; 
"What  lands  so  distant  from  that  scene  of  death 
But  trembling  heard  the  fame  ?  and,  heard,  admire 
How  well  the  son  appeas'd  his  slaughter'd  sire  ! 
E'en  to  th'  unhappy,  that  unjustly  bleed, 
Heaven  gives  posterity,  t'  avenge  the  deed. 
So  fell  Egysthus ;  and  may'st  thou,  my  friend, 
(On  whom  the  virtues  of  thy  sire  descend) 
Make  future  times  thy  equal  act  adore, 
And  be  what  brave  Orestes  was  before!" 

The  prudent  youth  replied :  "  O  thou,  the  grace 
And  lasting  glory  of  the  Grecian  race ! 
Just  was  the  vengeance,  and  to  latest  days 
Shall  long  posterity  resound  the  praise. 


Book  3.  THE  ODYSSEY. 


Some  god  this  arm  with  equal  prowess  bless  I 
And  the  proud  suitors  shall  its  force  confess : 
Injurious  men  !  who  while  my  soul  is  sore 
Of  fresh  affronts,  are  meditating  more. 
But  heaven  denies  this  honour  to  my  hand, 
Nor  shall  my  father  repossess  the  land  : 
The  father's  fortune  never  to  return, 
And  the  sad  son's  to  suffer  and  to  mourn  !" 

Thus  he  ;  and  Nestor  took  the  word ;  "  My  son, 
Is  it  then  true,  as  distant  rumours  run, 
That  crowds  of  rivals  for  thy  mother's  charms 
Thy  palace  fill  with  insults  and  alarms  1 
Say,  is  the  fault,  through  tame  submission  thine  % 
Or  leagued  against  thee,  do  thy  people  join, 
Mov'd  by  some  oracle,  or  voice  divine  ? 
And  yet  who  knows,  but  ripening  lies  in  fate 
An  hour  of  vengeance  for  th'  afflicted  state ; 
When  great  Ulysses  shall  suppress  these  harms, 
Ulysses  singly,  or  all  Greece  in  arms  ? 
But  if  Athena,  war's  triumphant  maid 
The  happy  son  will,  as  the  father,  aid, 
(Whose  fame  and  safety  was  her  constant  care, 
In  every  danger  and  in  every  war: 
Never  on  man  did  heavenly  favour  shine 
With  rays  so  strong,  distinguish'd,  and  divine, 
As  those  with  which  Minerva  mark'd  thy  sire) 
So  might  she  love  thee,  so  thy  soul  inspire  ! 
Soon  should  their  hopes  in  humble  dust  be  laid, 
And  long  oblivion  of  the  bridal  bed.'' 

"  Ah !  no  such  hope  (the  prince  with  sighs  replies) 
Can  touch  my  breast ;  that  blessing  heaven  denies  : 
E'en  by  celestial  favour  were  it  given, 
Fortune  or  fate  would  cross  the  will  of  heaven." 

"  What  words  are  these,  and  what  imprudence  thine? 
(Thus  interpos'd  the  martial  maid  divine) 


46 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  3. 


Forgetful  youth !  but  know,  the  power  above 
With  ease  can  save  each  object  of  his  love ; 
Wide  as  he  will,  extends  his  boundless  grace ; 
Nor  lost  in  time,  nor  circumscrib'd  by  place. 
Happier  his  lot,  who,  many  sorrows  past, 
Long  labouring  gains  his  natal  shore  at  last ; 
Than  who,  too  speedy,  hastes  to  end  his  life 
By  some  stern  ruffian,  or  adulterous  wife. 
Death  only  is  the  lot  which  none  can  miss, 
And  all  is  possible  to  heaven,  but  this. 
The  best,  the  dearest  favourite  of  the  sky 
Must  taste  that  cup,  for  man  is  born  to  die.'' 

Thus  check'd,  replied  Ulysses'  prudent  heir : 
{C  Mentor,  no  more — the  mournful  thought  forbear; 
For  he  no  more  must  draw  his  country's  breath, 
Already  snatch'd  by  fate,  and  the  black  doom  of  death  ! 
Pass  we  to  other  subjects :  and  engage 
On  themes  remote  the  venerable  sage : 
(Who  thrice  has  seen  the  perishable  kind  } 
Of  men  decay,  and  through  three  ages  shin'd,  > 
Like  gods  majestic,  and  like  gods  in  mind)  3 
For  much  he  knows,  and  just  conclusions  draws 
From  various  precedents,  and  various  laws. 
O  son  of  Neleus  !  awful  Nestor,  tell 
How  he,  the  mighty  Agamemnon,  fell ; 
By  what  strange  fraud  Egysthus  wrought,  relate, 
(By  force  he  could  not)  such  a  hero's  fate. 
Liv'd  Menelaus  not  in  Greece  ?  or  where 
Was  then  the  martial  brother's  pious  care  1 
Condemn'd  perhaps  some  foreign  shore  to  tread ; 
Or  sure  Egysthus  had  not  dar'd  the  deed." 

To  whom  the  full  of  days :  "  Illustrious  youth, 
Attend  (though  partly  thou  hast  guess'd)  the  truth : 
For  had  the  martial  Menelaus  found 
The  ruffian  breathing  yet  on  Argive  ground ; 


Book  3.  THE  ODYSSEY. 


Nor  earth  had  hid  his  carcass  from  the  skies, 
Nor  Grecian  virgins  shriek'd  his  obsequies, 
But  fowls  obscene  dismember'd  his  remains, 
And  dogs  had  torn  him  on  the  naked  plains. 
While  us  the  works  of  bloody  Mars  employ'd, 
The  wanton  youth  inglorious  peace  enjoy'd  ; 
He,  stretch'd  at  ease  in  Argos'  calm  recess, 
(Whose  stately  steeds  luxuriant  pastures  bless) 
With  flattery's  insinuating  art 
Sooth'd  the  frail  queen,  and  poison'd  all  her  heart. 
At  first  with  worthy  shame  and  decent  pride 
The  royal  dame  his  lawless  suit  denied. 
Fcr  virtue's  image  yet  possess'd  her  mind, 
Taught  by  a  master  of  the  tuneful  kind  : 
Atrides,  parting  for  the  Trojan  war, 
Consign'd  the  youthful  consort  to  his  care. 
True  to  his  charge,  the  bard  preserv'd  her  long 
In  honour's  limits ;  such  the  power  of  song. 
But  when  the  gods  these  objects  of  their  hate 
Dragg'd  to  destruction,  by  the  links  of  fate  ; 
The  bard  they  banish'd  from  his  native  soil, 
And  left  all  helpless  in  a  desert  isle : 
There  he,  the  sweetest  of  the  sacred  train, 
Sung  dying  to  the  rocks,  but  sung  in  vain. 
Then  virtue  was  no  more,  her  guard  away, 
She  fell,  to  lust  a  voluntary  prey. 
E'en  to  the  temple  stalk 'd  th'  adulterous  spouse, 
With  impious  thanks  ;  and  mockery  of  vows, 
With  images,  with  garments,  and  with  gold  : 
And  odorous  fumes  from  loaded  altars  roll'd. 

M  Meantime  from  flaming  Troy  we  cut  the  way, 
With  Menelaiis,  through  the  curling  sea. 
But  when  to  Sunium's  sacred  point  we  came, 
Crown'd  with  the  temple  of  th'  Athenian  dame  ; 
Atrides'  pilot,  Phrontes  there  expir'd ; 


48 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  3. 


(Phrontes,  of  all  the  sons  of  men  admir'd 

To  steer  the  bounding  bark  with  steady  toil, 

When  the  storm  thickens,  and  the  billows  boil) 

While  yet  he  exercis'd  the  steerman's  art, 

Apollo  touch'd  him  with  his  gentle  dart; 

E'en  with  the  rudder  in  his  hand  he  fell. 

To  pay  whose  honours  to  the  shades  of  hell, 

We  check'd  our  haste,  by  pious  office  bound, 

And  laid  our  old  companion  in  the  ground. 

And  now  the  rites  discharg'd,  our  course  wre  keep 

Far  on  the  gloomy  bosom  of  the  deep  : 

Soon  as  M alsesa's  misty  tops  arise, 

Sudden  thethunderer  blackens  all  the  skies, 

And  the  winds  whistle,  and  the  surges  roll 

Mountains  on  mountains,  and  obscure  the  pole. 

The  tempest  scatters,  and  divides  our  fleet ; 

Part,  the  storm  urges  on  the  coast  of  Crete, 

Where,  winding  round  the  rich  Cydonian  plain, 

The  streams  of  Jardan  issue  to  the  main. 

There  stands  a  rock,  high,  eminent,  and  steep, 

Whose  shaggy  brow  o'erhangs  the  shady  deep, 

And  views  Gortyna  on  the  western  side, 

On  this  rough  Auster  drove  th'  impetuous  tide  : 

With  broken  force  the  billows  roll'd  away, 

And  heav'd  the  fleet  into  the  neighbouring  bay  ; 

Thus  sav'd  from  death,  they  gain'd  the  Phsestan  shores, 

With  shatter' d  vessels,  and  disabled  oars  : 

But  five  tall  barks  the  winds  and  waters  toss'd, 

Par  from  their  fellows,  on  the  Egyptian  coast. 

There  wander'd  Menelaiis  through  foreign  shores, 

Amassing  gold,  and  gathering  naval  stores  ; 

While  curs'd  Egysthus  the  detested  deed 

By  fraud  fulrilPd,  and  his  great  brother  bled. 

Seven  years  the  traitor  rich  Mycense  sway'd, 

And  his  stern  rule  the  groaning  land  obey'd  ; 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


The  eighth,  from  Athens  to  his  realm  restor'd, 

Orestes  brandish'd  the  revenging  sword, 

Slew  the  dire  pair,  and  gave  to  funeral  flame 

The  vile  assassin  and  adulterous  dame. 

That  day,  ere  yet  the  bloody  triumphs  cease, 

Return'd  Atrides  to  the  coast  of  Greece, 

And  safe  to  Argos'  port  his  navy  brought, 

With  gifts  of  price,  and  ponderous  treasure  fraught. 

Hence  warn'd,  my  son,  beware  !  nor  idly  stand 

Too  long  a  stranger  to  thy  native  land  ; 

Lest  heedless  absence  wear  thy  wealth  away, 

While  lawless  feasters  in  thy  palace  sway  ; 

Perhaps  may  seize  thy  realm,  and  share  the  spoil ; 

And  thou  return,  with  disappointed  toil, 

From  thy  vain  journey,  to  a  rifled  isle. 

Howe'er,  my  friend,  indulge  one  labour  more, 

And  seek  Atrides  on  the  spartan  shore. 

He,  wandering  long,  a  wider  circle  made, 

And  many-languag'd  nations  has  survey'd  ; 

And  measur'd  tracts  unknown  to  other  ships, 

Amid  the  monstrous  wonders  of  the  deeps : 

(A  length  of  ocean  and  unbounded  sky, 

Which  scarce  the  sea-fowl  in  a  year  o'erfly) 

Go  then ;  to  Sparta  take  the  watery  way, 

Thy  ship  and  sailors  but  for  orders  stay ; 

Or  if  by  land  thou  choose  thy  course  to  bend, 

My  steeds,  my  chariots,  and  my  sons  attend : 

Thee  to  Atrides  they  shall  safe  convey, 

Guides  of  thy  road,  companions  of  thy  way. 

Urge  him  with  truth  to  frame  his  free  replies ; 

And  sure  he  will;  for  Menelatis  is  wise." 

Thus  while  he  speaks,  the  ruddy  sun  descends, 
And  twilight  gray  her  evening  shade  extends. 
Then  thus  the  blue-ey'd  maid  :  "  O  full  of  days  ! 
Wise  are  thy  words,  and  just  are  all  thy  ways. 

D 


50 


THE    OD  YSSEY. 


Book  3. 


Now  immolate  the  tongues,  and  mix  the  the  wine, 

Sacred  to  Neptune  and  the  powers  divine. 
The  lamp  of  day  is  quench'd  beneath  the  deep, 
And  soft  approach  the  balmy  hours  of  sleep : 
Nor  fits  it  to  prolong  the  heavenly  feast : 
Timeless,  indecent,  but  retire  to  rest." 

So  spake  Jove's  daughter,  the  celestial  maid, 
The  sober  train  attended  and  obey'd. 
The  sacred  heralds  on  their  hands  around 
Pour'd  the  full  urns;  the  youths  the  goblets  crown'd  : 
From  bowl  to  bowl  the  holy  beverage  Hows ; 
"While  to  the  final  sacrifice  they  rose. 
The  tongues  they  cast  upon  the  fragrant  flame, 
And  pour,  above,  the  consecrated  stream. 
And  now,  their  thirst  by  copious  draughts  allay'd, 
The  youthful  hero  and  th'  Athenian  maid 
Propose  departure  from  the  finish'd  rite, 
And  in  their  hollow  bark  to  pass  the  night : 
But  this  the  hospitable  sage  denied  : 
"  Forbid  itj  Jove  !  and  all  the  gods !  (he  cried) 
Thus  from  my  walls  the  much-lov'd  son  to  send 
Of  such  a  hero,  and  of  such  a  friend  1 
Me,  as  some  needy  peasant,  would  ye  leave, 
Whom  heaven  denies  the  blessing  to  relieve  1 
Me  would  you  leave,  who  boast  imperial  sway, 
When  beds  of  royal  state  invite  your  stay  1 
No — long  as  life  this  mortal  shall  inspire, 
Or  as  my  children  imitate  their  sire, 
Here  shall  the  wandering  stranger  find  his  home, 
And  hospitable  rites  adorn  the  dome." 

"  Well  hast  thou  spoke  (the  blue-ey'd  maid  replies,) 
Belov'd  old  man  !  benevolent,  as  wise. 
Be  the  kind  dictates  of  thy  heart  obey'd, 
And  let  thy  words  Telemachus  persuade : 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


He  to  thy  palace  shall  thy  steps  pursue  ; 

I  to  the  ship,  to  give  the  orders  due, 

Prescribe  directions,  and  confirm  the  crew : 

For  I  alone  sustain  their  naval  cares. 

Who  boast  experience  from  these  silver  hairs ; 

All  youths  the  rest,  whom  to  this  journey  move 

Like  years,  like  tempers,  and  their  prince's  love. 

There  in  the  vessel  1  shall  pass  the  night : 

And  soon  as  morning  paints  the  fields  of  light, 

I  go  to  challenge  from  the  Caucons  bold 

A  debt,  contracted  in  the  days  of  old. 

But  this  thy  guest,  receiv'd  with  friendly  care, 

Let  thy  strong  coursers  swift  to  Sparta  bear; 

Prepare  thy  chariot  at  the  dawn  of  day, 

And  be  thy  son  companion  of  his  way." 

Then  turning  with  the  word,  Minerva  flies, 
And  soars  an  eagle  through  the  liquid  skies : 
Vision  divine  !  the  throng'd  spectators  gaze 
In  holy  wonder  fix'd,  and  still  amaze. 
But  chief  the  reverend  sage  admir'd ;  he  took 
The  hand  of  young  Telemachus,  and  spoke  : 

"  O  happy  youth  !  and  favour'd  of  the  skies, 
Distinguish'd  care  of  guardian  deities  ! 
Whose  early  years  for  future  worth  engage, 
No  vulgar  manhood,  no  ignoble  age. 
For  lo !  none  other  of  the  court  above 
Than  she,  the  daughter  of  almighty  Jove, 
Pallas  herself,  the  war-triumphant  maid  ; 
Confess'd  is  thine,  as  once  thy  father's  aid. 
So  guide  me,  goddess  !  so  propitious  shine 
On  me,  my  consort,  and  my  royal  line  ! 
A  yearling  bullock  to  thy  name  shall  smoke, 
Untam'd,  unconcious  of  the  galling  yoke, 
With  ample  forehead,  and  yet  tender  horns, 
Whose  budding  honours  ductile  gold  adorns." 


52 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  3. 


Submissive  thus  the  hoary  sire  preferr'd 
His  holy  vow  :  the  favouring  goddess  heard. 
Then  slowly  rising,  o'er  the  sandy  space 
Precedes  the  father,  follow'd  by  his  race, 
(A  long  procession)  timely  marching  home 
In  comely  order  to  the  regal  dome. 
There  when  arrived,  on  thrones  around  him  plac'd, 
His  sons  and  grandsons  the  wide  circle  grac'd. 
To  these  the  hospitable  sage,  in  sign 
Of  social  welcome,  mix'd  the  racy  wine 
(Late  from  the  mellowing  cask  restor'd  to  light, 
By  ten  long  years  refm'd,  and  rosy-bright.) 
To  Pallas  high  the  foaming  bowl  he  crown'd, 
And  sprinkled  large  libations  on  the  ground. 
Each  drinks  a  full  oblivion  of  his  cares. 
And  to  the  gifts  of  balmy  sleep  repairs. 
Deep  in  a  rich  alcove  the  prince  was  laid, 
And  slept  beneath  the  pompous  colon ade  ; 
Fast  by  his  side  Pisistratus  lay  spread, 
(In  age  his  equal)  on  a  splendid  bed  : 
But  in  an  inner  court,  securely  clos'd, 
The  reverend  Nestor  and  his  queen  repos'd. 

When  now  Aurora,  daughter  of  the  dawn, 
With  rosy  lustre  purpled  o'er  the  lawn; 
The  old  man  early  rose,  walk'd  forth,  and  sat 
On  polish'd  stone  before  his  palace  gate : 
With  unguents  smooth  the  lucid  marble  shone, 
Where  ancient  Neleus  sat,  a  rustic  throne ; 
But  he  descending  to  th'  infernal  shade, 
Sage  Nestor  fill'd  it,  and  the  sceptre  sway'd. 
His  sons  around  him  mild  obeisance  pay, 
And  duteous  take  the  orders  of  the  day. 
First  Echephron  and  Stratius  quit  their  bed  ; 
Then  Perseus,  Aretus,  and  Thrasymedj 
The  last  Pisistratus  arose  from  rest  j 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


They  came,  and  near  him  plac'd  the  stranger-guest. 

To  these  the  senior  thus  deelar'd  his  will: 

11  My  sons !  the  dictates  of  your  sire  fulfil. 

To  Pajjas,  first  of  gods,  prepare  the  feast, 

Who  grac'd  our  rites,  a  more  than  mortal  guest. 

Let  one,  despatchful,  bid  some  swain  to  lead 

A  well-fed  bullock  from  the  grassy  mead  ; 

One  seek  the  harbour  where  the  vessels  moor, 

And  bring  thy  friends,  Telemachus!  ashore  ; 

(Leave  only  two  the  galley  to  attend) 

Another  to  Laerceus  must  we  send, 

Artist  divine,  whose  skilful  hands  infold 

The  victim's  horn  with  circumfusile  gold. 

The  rest  may  here  the  pious  duty  share, 

And  bid  the  handmaids  for  the  feast  prepare, 

The  seats  to  range,  the  fragrant  wood  to  bring, 

And  limpid  waters  from  the  living  spring." 

He  said,  and  busy  each  his  care  bestow' d  ; 
Already  at  the  gates  the  bullock  low'd, 
Already  came  the  Ithacensian  crew, 
The  dext'rous  smith  the  tools  already  drew  ; 
His  ponderous  hammer,  and  his  anvil  sound, 
And  the  strong  tongs  to  turn  the  metal  round. 
Nor  was  Minerva  absent  from  the  rite, 
She  view'd  her  honours,  and  enjoy'd  the  sight. 
With  reverend  hand  the  king  presents  the  gold,  ) 
Which  round  thJ  intorted  horns  the  gilder  roll'd ;  > 
So  wrought,  as  Pallas  might  with  pride  behold.  \ 
Young  Aretus  from  forth  his  bridal  bow'r  i 
Brought  the  full  laver,  o'er  their  hands  to  pour,  > 
And  canisters  of  consecrated  flour.  J 
Stratius  and  Echephron  the  victim  led  ; 
The  axe  was  held  by  warlike  Thrasymed, 
In  act  to  strike  :  before  him  Perseus  stood, 
The  vase  extending  to  receive  the  blood. 


THE  ODYSSEY". 


Book  3. 


The  king  himself  initiates  to  the  pow'r ; 

Scatters  with  quivering  hand  the  sacred  flour, 

And  the  stream  sprinkles :  from  the  curling  brows 

The  hair  collected  in  the  fire  he  throws.  i 

Soon  as  due  vows  on  every  part  were  paid, 

And  sacred  wheat  upon  the  victim  laid, 

Strong  Thrasymed  discharg'd  the  speeding  blow 

Full  on  his  neck,  and  cut  the  nerves  in  two. 

Down  sunk  the  heavy  beast :  the  females  round, 

Maids,  wives,  and  matrons,  mix  a  shrilling  sound. 

Nor  scorn 'd  the  queen  the  holy  choir  to  join 

(The  first-born  she,  of  old  Ciymenus'  line  ; 

In  youth  by  Nestor  lov'd,  of  spotless  fame, 

And  lov'd  in  age,  Eurydice  by  name.) 

From  earth  they  rear  him,  struggling  now  with  death  ; 

And  Nestor's  youngest  stops  the  vents  of  breath. 

The  soul  for  ever  flies  :  on  all  sides  round 

Streams  the  black  blood,  and  smokes  upon  the  ground. 

The  beast  they  then  divide,  and  disunite 

The  ribs  and  limbs,  observant  of  the  rite  : 

On  these,  in  double  cawls  involv'd  with  art, 

The  choicest  morsels  lay  from  every  part. 

The  sacred  sage  before  his  altar  stands, 

Turns  the  burnt-offering  with  his  holy  hands, 

And  pours  the  wine,  and  bids  the  flames  aspire : 

The  youths  with  instruments  surround  the  fire. 

The  thighs  now  sacrific'd,  and  entrails  dress'd, 

Th'  assistants  part,  transfix,  and  boil  the  rest. 

While  these  officious  tend  the  rites  divine, 

The  last  fair  branch  of  the  Nestorean  line, 

Sweet  Poly  caste,  took  the  pleasing  toil 

To  bathe  the  prince,  and  pour  the  fragrant  oil. 

O'er  his  fair  limbs  a  flowery  vest  he  threw, 

And  issued,  like  a  god,  to  mortal  view. 


Book  3. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


His  former  seat  beside  the  king  he  found, 
(I  lis  people's  father  with  his  peers  around) 
All  plac'd  at  case  the  holy  banquet  join, 
And  in  the  dazzling  goblet  laughs  the  wine. 

The  rage  of  thirst  and  hunger  now  suppress'd, 
The  monarch  turns  him  to  his  royal  guest; 
And  for  the  promis'd  journey  bids  prepare 
The  smooth-hair'd  horses,  and  the  rapid  car. 
Observant  of  his  word,  the  word  scarce  spoke, 
The  sons  obey,  and  join  them  to  the  yoke. 
Then  bread  and  wine  a  ready  handmaid  brings, 
And  presents  such  as  suit  the  state  of  kings. 
The  glittering  seat  Telemachus  ascends: 
His  faithful  guide,  Pisistratus  attends ; 
With  hasty  hand  the  ruling  reigns  he  drew  : 
He  lash'd  the  coursers,  and  the  coursers  flew. 
Beneath  the  bounding  yoke  alike  they  held 
Their  equal  pace,  and  smok'd  along  the  field. 
The  towers  of  Pylos  sink,  its  views  decay,  ^ 
Fields  after  fields  fly  back,  till  close  of  day  :  > 
Then  sunk  the  sun.  and  darken' d  all  the  way.  ) 

To  PhersB  now,  Diocleus'  stately  seat, 
(Of  Alpheus'  race)  the  weary  youths  retreat. 
His  house  affords  the  hospitable  rite, 
And  pleas'd  they  sleep  (the  blessing  of  the  night.) 
But  when  Aurora,  daughter  of  the  dawn, 
With  rosy  lustre  purpled  o'er  the  lawn ; 
Again  they  mount,  their  journey  to  renew, 
And  from  the  sounding  portico  they  flew. 
Along  the  waving  fields  their  way  they  hold, 
The  fields  receding  as  the  chariot  roll'd: 
Then  slowly  sunk  the  ruddy  globe  of  light 
And  o'er  the  shaded  landscape  rush'd  the  night. 


BOOK  IV. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE  CONFERENCE  WITH  MENELAUS. 

TELE  ATA  CHI  IS,  with  Pisistratus,  arriving  at  Sparta,  is  hospitably 
received  by  Menelaus.  to  whom  he  relates  the  cause  of  his  coming, 
and  learns  from  him  many  particulars  of  what  befel  the  Greeks 
since  the  destruction  of  Troy.  He  dwells  more  at  large  upon  the 
prophecies  of  Proteus  to  him  in  his  return,  from  which  he  ac- 
quaints Telemachus,  that  Ulysses  is  detained  in  the  island  of 
Calypso. 

In  the  meantime  the  suitors  consult  to  destroy  Telemachus  in  his 
voyage  home.  Penelope  is  apprised  of  this,  but  comforted  in  a 
dream  by  Pallas,  in  the  shape  of  her  sister  Ipthima. 

And  now  proud  Sparta  with  their  wheels  resounds, 
Sparta,  whose  walls  a  range  of  hills  surrounds : 
At  the  fair  dome  the  rapid  labour  ends ; 
Where  sat  Atrides  midst  his  bridal  friends, 
With  double  vows  invoking  Hymen's  pow'r, 
To  bless  his  son's  and  daughter's  nuptial  hour. 

That  day,  to  great  Achilles'  son  resign'd, 
Hermione,  the  fairest  of  her  kind, 
Was  sent  to  crown  the  long-protracted  joy, 
Espous'd  before  the  fatal  doom  of  Troy : 


58 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


With  steeds  and  gilded  cars,  a  gorgeous  train 
Attend  the  nymph  to  Phthia's  distant  reign. 
Meanwhile  at  home,  to  Megapenthes'  bed 
The  virgin-choir  Alector's  daughter  led. 
Brave  Megapenthes ;  from  a  stol'n  amour 
To  great  Atrides'  age  his  handmaid  bore : 
To  Helen's  bed  the  gods  alone  assign 
Hermione,  t'  extend  the  regal  line ; 
On  whom  a  radiant  pomp  of  graces  wait, 
Resembling  Venus  in  attractive  state. 

While  this  gay  friendly  troop  the  king  surround, 
With  festival  and  mirth  the  roofs  resound ; 
A  bard  amid  the  joyous  circle  sings 
High  airs,  attemper'd  to  the  vocal  strings; 
Whilst,  warbling  to  the  varied  strain,  advance 
Two  sprightly  youths  to  form  the  bounding  dance. 
'Twas  then,  that  issuing  through  the  palace  gate 
The  splendid  car  roll'd  slow  in  regal  state : 
On  the  bright  eminence  young  Nestor  shone, 
And  fast  beside  him  great  Ulysses'  son. 
Grave  Eteoneus  saw  the  pomp  appear, 
And,  speeding,  thus  address'd  the  royal  ear: 

"  Two  youths  approach,  whose  semblant  features 
prove 

Their  blood  devolving  from  the  source  of  Jove. 
Is  due  reception  deign'd,  or  must  they  bend 
Their  doubtful  course  to  seek  a  distant  friend  Vf 

"  Insensate  !  (with  a  sigh  the  king  replies) 
Too  long,  misjudging,  have  I  thought  thee  wise: 
But  sure  relentless  folly  steels  thy  breast, 
Obdurate  to  reject  the  stranger-guest ; 
To  those  dear  hospitable  rights  a  foe, 
Which  in  my  wanderings  oft  reliev'd  my  wo: 
Fed  by  the  bounty  of  another's  board, 
Till  pitying  Jove  my  native  realm  restor'd — 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Strait  be  the  couriers  from  the  car  rcleas'd, 
Conduct  the  youths  to  grace  Ihc  genial  feast." 

The  seneschal,  rebuk'd,  in  haste  withdrew  ; 
With  equal  haste  a  menial  train  pursue: 
Part  led  the  coursers,  from  the  car  enlarg'd, 
Each  to  a  crib  with  choicest  grain  surcharg'd; 
Part  in  a  portico,  profusely  grae'd 
With  rich  magnificence,  the  chariot  plac'd  ; 
Then  to  the  dome  the  friendly  pair  invite 
Who  eye  the  dazzling  roofs  with  vast  delight, 
Resplendent  as  the  blaze  of  summer-noon, 
Or  the  pale  radiance  of  the  midnight  moon. 
From  room  to  room  their  eager  view  they  bend; 
Thence  to  the  bath,  a  beauteous  pile,  descend  ; 
Where  a  bright  damsel-train  attends  the  guests 
With  liquid  odours,  and  embroider'd  vests. 
Refresh'd,  they  wait  them  to  the  bower  of  state, 
Where  circled  with  his  peers  Atrides  sat: 
Thron'd  next  the  king,  the  fair  attendant  brings 
The  purest  product  of  the  crystal  springs; 
High  on  a  massy  vase  of  silver  mould,  . 
The  burnish'd  laver  flames  with  solid  gold : 
In  solid  gold  the  purple  vintage  flows, 
Ami  on  the  board  a  second  banquet  rose. 
When  thus  the  king  with  hospitable  port : 
({  Accept  this  welcome  to  the  Spartan  court; 
The  waste  of  nature  let  the  feast  repair, 
Then  your  high  lineage  and  your  names  declare 
Say  from  what  sceptred  ancestry  ye  claim, 
Recorded  eminent  in  deathless  fame  1 
For  vulgar  parents  cannot  stamp  their  race 
With  signatures  of  such  majestic  grace." 

Ceasing,  benevolent  he  straight  assigns 
The  royal  portion  of  the  choicest  chines 
To  each  accepted  friend  :  with  grateful  haste 
They  share  the  honours  of  the  rich  repast. 


GO 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


Suffic'd,  soft  whispering  thus  to  Nestor's  son, 
His  head  reclin'd,  young  Ithacus  begun  : 

u  View'st  thotf  unmov'd,  O  ever-honour'd  most! 
These  prodigies  of  art,  and  wondrous  cost  1 
Above,  beneath,  around  the  palace  shines 
The  sumless  treasure  of  exhausted  mines  : 
The  spoils  of  elephants  the  roofs  inlay, 
And  studded  amber  darts  a  golden  ray  : 
Such,  and  not  nobler,  in  the  realms  above 
My  wonder  dictates  is  the  dome  of  Jove." 

The  monarch  took  the  word,  and  grave  replied : 
"  Presumptuous  are  the  vaunts,  and  vain  the  pride 
Of  man  who  dares  in  pomp  with  Jove  contest, 
Unchang'd,  immortal,  and  supremely  bless'd ! 
With  all  my  affluence  when  my  woes  are  weigh'd, 
Envy  will  own,  the  purchase  dearly  paid. 
For  eight  slow-circling  years  by  tempest  tost, 
From  Cyprus  to  the  fair  Phoenician  coast, 
(Sidon  the  capital)  I  stretch'd  my  toil 
Through  regions  fatten'd  with  the  flows  of  Nile. 
Next  Ethiopia's  utmost  bound  explore, 
And  the  parch'd  borders  of  th'  Arabian  shore : 
Then  warp  my  voyage  on  the  southern  gales, 
O'er  the  warm  Libyan  wave  to  spread  my  sails ; 
That  happy  clime  !  where  each  revolving  year 
The  teeming  ewes  a  triple  offspring  bear, 
And  two  fair  crescents  of  translucent  horn 
The  brows  of  all  their  young  increase  adorn ; 
The  shepherd  swains  with  sure  abundance  bless'd, 
On  the  fat  flock  and  rural  dainties  feast ; 
Nor  want  of  herbage  makes  the  dairy  fail, 
But  every  season  fills  the  foaming  pail. 
Whilst  heaping  unwish'd  wealth,  1  distant  roam, 
The  best  of  brothers,  at  his  natal  home, 
By  the  dire  fury  of  a  traitress  wife, 
Ends  the  sad  evening  of  a  stormy  life : 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Whence  with  incessant  grief  my  soul  annoy'd, 

These  riches  are  possess'd,  but  not  enjoy'd! 

My  wars,  the  copious  theme  of  every  tongue, 

To  you,  your  fathers  have  recorded  long: 

How  favouring  heaven  repaid  my  glorious  toils 

With  a  sack'd  palace,  and  barbaric  spoils. 

Oh  !  had  the  gods  so  large  a  boon  denied, 

And  life,  the  just  equivalent,  supplied 

To  those  brave  warriors,  who,  with  glory  fir'd, 

Far  from  their  country  in  my  cause  expir'd ! 

Still  in  short  intervals  of  pleasing  wo, 

Regardful  of  the  friendly  dues  I  owe, 

I  to  the  glorious  dead,  for  ever  dear, 

Indulge  the  tribute  of  a  grateful  tear. 

But  oh  !  Ulysses — deeper  than  the  rest 

That  sad  idea  wounds  my  anxious  breast! 

My  heart  bleeds  fresh  with  agonizing  pain ; 

The  bowl,  and  tasteful  viands  tempt  in  vain, 

Nor  sleep's  soft  pow'r  can  close  my  streaming  eyes, 

When  imag'd  to  my  soul  his  sorrows  rise. 

No  peril  in  my  cause  he  ceas'd  to  prove, 

His  labours  equalled  only  by  my  love. 

And  both  alike  to  bitter  fortune  born, 

For  him  to  suffer,  and  for  me  to  mourn ! 

Whether  he  wanders  on  some  friendly  coast, 

Or  glides  in  Stygian  gloom  a  pensive  ghost, 

No  fame  reveals ;  but  doubtful  of  his  doom, 

His  good  old  sire  with  sorrow  to  the  tomb 

Declines  his  trembling  steps  ;  untimely  care 

"Withers  the  blooming  vigour  of  his  heir ; 

And  the  chaste  partner  of  his  bed  and  throne 

Wastes  all  her  widow'd  hours  in  tender  moan." 

While  thus  pathetic  to  the  prince  he  spoke, 
From  the  brave  youth  the  streaming  passion  broke : 
Studious  to  veil  the  grief,  in  vain  repress'd, 
His  face  he  shrouded  with  his  purple  vest. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


The  conscious  monarch  pierc'd  the  coy  disguise, 
And  view'd  his  filial  love  with  vast  surprise  : 
Dubious  to  press  the  tender  theme,  or  wait 
To  hear  the  youth  inquire  his  father's  fate : 

In  this  suspense  bright  Helen  grac'd  the  room ; 
Before  her  breath'd  a  gale  of  rich  perfume: 
So  moves,  adorn'd  with  each  attractive  grace, 
The  silver-shafted  goddess  of  the  chase  ! 
The  seat  of  majesty  Adraste  brings, 
With  art  illustrious,  for  the  pomp  of  kings. 
To  spread  the  pall  (beneath  the  regal  chair) 
Of  softest  woof,  is  bright  Alcippe's  care. 
A  silver  canister  divinely  wrought, 
In  her  soft  hands  the  beauteous  Phylo  brought: 
To  Sparta's  queen  of  old  the  radiant  vase 
Alcandra  gave,  a  pledge  of  royal  grace  : 
For  Polybus  her  lord  (whose  sovereign  sway 
The  wealthy  tribes  of  Pharian  Thebes  obey,) 
When  to  that  court  Atrides  came,  caress'd 
With  vast  munificence  th'  imperial  guest; 
Two  lavers  from  the  richest  ore  refin'd, 
With  silver  tripods,  the  kind  host  assign'd  : 
And,  bounteous,  from  the  royal  treasure  told 
Ten  equal  talents  of  refulgent  gold. 
Alcandra,  consort  of  his  high  command, 
A  golden  distaff  gave  to  Helen's  hand  ; 
And  that  rich  vase,  with  living  sculpture  wrought, 
Which  heap'd  with  wool  the  beauteous  Phylo  brought: 
The  silken  fleece  impurpled  for  the  loom, 
Rivall'd  the  hyacinth  in  vernal  bloom. 
The  sovereign  seat  then  Jove-born  Helen  press'd, 
And  pleasing  thus  her  sceptred  lord  address'd : 

li  Who  grace  our  palace  now,  that  friendly  pair, 
Speak  they  their  lineage}  or  their  names  declared 
Uncertain  of  the  truth,  yet  uncontroll'd 
Hear  me  the  bodings  of  my  breast  unfold. 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


With  wonder  rapt,  on  yonder  check  I  trace 

The  features  of  the  Ulyssean  race  : 

Diflus'd  o'er  each  resembling  line  appear, 

In  just  similitude,  the  grace  and  air 

Of  young  Telemachus,  the  lovely  hoy, 

Who  bless'd  Ulysses  with  a  father's  joy, 

What  time  the  Greeks  comhin'd  their  social  arms, 

To  avenge  the  stain  of  my  ill-fated  charms!" 

"  Just  is  thy  thought,  (the  king  assenting  cries) 
Methinks  Ulysses  strikes  my  wondering  eyes  : 
Full  shines  the  father  in  the  filial  frame, 
His  port,  his  features,  and  his  shape  the  same  : 
Such  quick  regards  his  sparkling  eyes  bestow; 
Such  wavy  ringlets  o'er  his  shoulders  flow  ! 
And  when  he  heard  the  long  disastrous  store 
Of  cares,  which  in  my  cause  Ulysses  bore, 
Dismay 'd,  heart-wounded  with  paternal  woes, 
Ahove  restraint  the  tide  of  sorrow  rose  : 
Cautious  to  let  the  gushing  grief  appear, 
His  purple  garment  veil'd  the  falling  tear." 

"  See  there  confess'd,  (Pisistratus  replies) 
The  genuine  worth  of  Ithacus  the  wise! 
Of  that  heroic  sire  the  youth  is  sprung, 
But  modest  awe  hath  chain'd  his  timorous  tongue. 
Thy  voice,  O  king !  with  pleas'd  attention  heard, 
Is  like  the  dictates  of  a  god  rever'd. 
With  him  at  Nestor's  high  command  I  came, 
Whose  age  I  honour  with  a  parent's  name. 
By  adverse  destiny  constraint  to  sue 
For  council  and  redress,  he  sues  to  you. 
Whatever  ill  the  friendless  orphan  bears, 
Bereav'd  of  parents  in  his  infant  years, 
Still  must  the  wrong'd  Telemachus  sustain, 
If  hopeful  of  your  aid,  he  hopes  in  vain  : 
AfKanc'd  in  your  friendly  power  alone, 
The  youth  would  vindicate  the  vacant  throne." 


64 


THE    OD  YSSEY. 


Book  4. 


{<Is  Sparta  bless'd,  and  these  desiring  eyes 
View  my  friend's  son  1  (the  king  exulting  cries) 
Son  of  my  friend,  by  glorious  toils  approv'd, 
Whose  sword  was  sacred  to  the  man  he  lov'd: 
Mirror  of  constant  faith,  rever'd,  and  mourn'd  !— 
When  Troy  was  ruin'd,  had  the  chief  return'd, 
No  Greek  an  equal  space  had  e'er  possess'd, 
Of  dear  affection,  in  my  grateful  breast. 
I,  to  confirm  the  mutual  joys  we  shar'd, 
For  his  abode  a  capital  prepar'd  ; 
Argos  the  seat  of  sovereign  rule  I  chose ; 
Fair  in  the  plan  the  future  palace  rose, 
Where  my  Ulysses  and  his  race  might  reign, 
And  portion  to  his  tribes  the  wide  domain. 
To  them  my  vassals  had  resign'd  a  soil, 
With  teeming  plenty  to  reward  their  toil 
There  with  commutual  zeal  we  both  had  strove 
In  acts  of  dear  benevolence  and  love  : 
Brothers  in  peace,  not  rivals  in  command, 
And  death  alone  dissolv'd  the  friendly  band ! 
Some  envious  power  the  blissful  scene  destroys ; 
Vanish'd  are  all  the  visionary  joys  : 
The  soul  of  friendship  to  my  hope  is  lost, 
Fated  to  wander  from  his  natal  coast !" 

He  ceas'd  ;  a  gust  of  grief  began  to  rise  : 
Fast  streams  a  tide  from  beauteous  Helen's  eyes  : 
Fast  for  the  sire  the  filial  sorrows  flow  ; 
The  weeping  monarch  swells  the  mighty  wo : 
Thy  cheeks,  Pisistratus,  the  tears  bedew, 
While  pictur'd  to  thy  mind  appeared  in  view 
Thy  martial  brother,*  on  the  Phrygian  plain 
Extended  pale,  by  swarthy  Memnon  slain ! 
But  silence  soon  the  son  of  Nestor  broke, 
And  melting  with  fraternal  pity  spoke : 


*  Antilochus. 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


"  Frequent,  O  king,  was  Nestor  wont  to  raise 
And  charm  attention  with  thy  copious  praise : 
To  crown  thy  various  gifts,  the  sage  assigned 
The  glory  of  a  firm  capacious  mind  : 
"With  that  superior  attribute  control 
This  unavailing  impotence  of  soul. 
Let  not  your  roof  with  echoing  grief  resound, 
Now  for  the  feast  the  friendly  bowl  is  crown'd  : 
But  when  from  dewy  shade  emerging  bright 
Aurora  streaks  the  sky  with  orient  light, 
Let  each  deplore  his  dead :  the  rites  of  wo 
Are  all,  alas !  the  living  can  bestow  : 
O'er  the  congenial  dust  enjoin'd  to  shear 
The  graceful  curl,  and  drop  the  tender  tear. 
Then  mingling  in  the  mournful  pomp  with  you, 
I'll  pay  my  brother's  ghost  a  warrior's  due, 
And  mourn  the  brave  Antilochus,  a  name 
Not  unrecorded  in  the  rolls  of  fame ; 
With  strength  and  speed  superior  form'd,  in  fight 
To  face  the  foe,  or  intercept  his  flight : 
Too  early  snatch'd  by  fate  ere  known  to  me ! 
I  boast  a  witness  of  his  worth  in  thee." 

"  Young  and  mature !  the  monarch  thus  rejoins, 
In  thee  renew 'd  the  soul  of  Nestor  shines: 
Form'd  by  the  care  of  that  consummate  sage, 
In  early  bloom  an  oracle  of  age. 
Whene'er  his  influence  Jove  vouchsafes  to  show'r 
To  bless  the  natal,  and  the  nuptial  hour ; 
From  the  great  sire  transmissive  to  the  race, 
The  boon  devolving  gives  distinguish'd  grace. 
Such,  happy  Nestor  !  was  thy  glorious  doom : 
Around  thee  full  of  years,  thy  offspring  bloom, 
Expert  of  arms,  and  prudent  in  debate ; 
The  gifts  of  heaven  to  guard  thy  hoary  state. 
But  now  let  each  becalm  his  troubled  breast, 
Wash,  and  partake  serene  the  friendly  feast. 
E 


66 


THE  ODYSSEY 


Book  4. 


To  move  thy  suit,  Telemachus,  delay, 

Till  heaven's  revolving  lamp  restores  the  day." 

He  said.    Asphalon  swift  the  laver  brings  : 
Alternate  all  partake  the  grateful  springs  : 
Then  from  the  rites  of  purity  repair, 
And  with  keen  gust  the  savoury  viands  share. 
Meantime  with  genial  joy  to  warm  the  soul, 
Bright  Helen  mix'd  a  mirth-inspiring  bowl ; 
Temper'd  with  drugs  of  sovereign  use,  t'  assuage 
The  boiling  bosom  of  tumultuous  rage ; 
To  clear  the  cloudy  front  of  wrinkled  care, 
And  dry  the  tearful  sluices  of  despair; 
Charm'd  with  that  virtuous  draught,  th'  exalted  mind 
All  sense  of  wo  delivers  to  the  wind  : 
Though  on  the  blazing  pile  his  parent  lay. 
Or  a  lov'd  brother  groan'd  his  life  away, 
Or  darling  son,  oppress'd  by  ruffian  force, 
Fell  breathless  at  his  feet  a  mangled  corse ; 
From  morn  to  eve,  impassive  and  serene, 
The  man  entranc'd  would  view  the  deathful  scene. 
These  drugs,  so  friendly  to  the  joys  of  life, 
Bright  Helen  learn'd  from  Thone's  imperial  wife; 
Who  sway'd  the  sceptre  where  prolific  Nile 
"With  various  simples  clothes  the  fatten'd  soil. 
With  wholesome  herbage  mix'd,  the  direful  bane 
Of  vegetable  venom  taints  the  plain  ; 
From  Paeon  sprung,  their  patron-god  imparts 
To  all  the  Pharian  race  his  healing  arts. 
The  beverage  now  prepar'd  to  inspire  the  feast, 
The  circle  thus  the  beauteous  queen  address'd : 

w  Thron'd  in  omnipotence,  supremest  Jove 
Tempers  the  fates  of  human  race  above ; 
By  the  firm  sanction  of  his  sovereign  will, 
Alternate  are  decreed  our  good  and  ill. 
To  feastful  mirth  be  this  white  hour  assign'd, 
And  sweet  discourse,  the  banquet  of  the  mind. 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


67 


Myself  assisting  in  the  social  joy, 
Will  tell  Ulysses'  bold  exploit  in  Troy : 
Sole  witness  of  the  deed  I  now  declare ; 
Speak  you  (who  saw)  his  wonders  in  the  war. 

"  Seam'd  o'er  with  wounds,  which  his  own  sabre  gave; 
In  the  vile  habit  of  a  village  slave, 
The  foe  deceiv'd,  he  pass'd  the  tented  plain, 
In  Troy  to  mingle  with  the  hostile  train. 
In  this  attire  secure  from  searching  eyes, 
Till  haply  piercing  through  the  dark  disguise 
The  chief  1  challeng'd  ;  he,  whose  practised  wit 
Knew  all  the  serpent-mazes  of  deceit, 
Eludes  my  search:  but  when  his  form  I  view'd 
Fresh  from  the  bath  with  fragrant  oil  renew'd, 
His  limbs  in  military  purple  dress'd ; 
Each  brightening  grace  the  genuine  Greek  confessed. 
A  previous  pledge  of  sacred  faith  obtain'd, 
Till  he  the  lines  and  Argive  fleet  regain'd, 
To  keep  his  stay  conceal'd  ;  the  chief  declar'd 
The  plans  of  war  against  the  town  prepar'd. 
Exploring  then  the  secrets  of  the  state, 
He  learn'd  what  best  might  urge  the  Dardan  fate  : 
And,  safe  returning  to  the  Grecian  host, 
Sent  many  a  shade  to  Pluto's  dreary  coast. 
Loud  grief  resounded  through  the  towers  of  Troy, 
But  my  pleas'd  bosom  glow'd  with  secret  joy  : 
For  then  with  dire  remorse,  and  conscious  shame, 
I  view'd  th'  effects  of  that  disastrous  flame, 
Which,  kindled  by  the  imperious  queen  of  love, 
Constrain'd  me  from  my  native  realm  to  rove : 
And  oft  in  bitterness  of  soul  deplor'd 
My  absent  daughter,  and  my  dearer  lord ; 
Admir'd  among  the  first  of  human  race, 
For  every  gift  of  mind  and  manly  grace." 

"  Right  well,  (replied  the  king)  your  speech  displays 
The  matchless  merit  of  the  chief  you  praise : 


68 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Heroes  in  various  climes  myself  have  found, 
For  martial  deeds  and  depth  of  thought  renown'd 
But  Ithacus,  unrivall'd  in  his  claim, 
May  boast  a  title  to  the  loudest  fame : 
In  battle  calm,  he  guides  the  rapid  storm, 
Wise  to  resolve,  and  patient  to  perform. 
What  wondrous  conduct  in  the  chief  appear'd, 
When  the  vast  fabric  of  the  steed  we  rear'd  ! 
Some  daemon,  anxious  for  the  Trojan  doom, 
Urg'd  you  with  great  Deiphobus  to  come, 
T'  explore  the  fraud;  with  guile  oppos'd  to  guile, 
Slow-pacing  thrice  around  tlr  insidious  pile, 
Each  noted  leader's  name  you  thrice  invoke, 
Your  accent  varying  as  their  spouses  spoke  : 
The  pleasing  sounds  each  latent  warrior  warm'd, 
But  most  Tydides'  and  my  heart  alarm'd : 
To  quit  the  steed  we  both  impatient  press, 
Threatening  to  answer  from  the  dark  recess. 
Unmov'd  the  mind  of  Ithacus  remain'd. 
And  the  vain  ardours  of  our  love  restraint : 
But  Anticlus,  unable  to  control, 
Spoke  loud  the  language  of  his  yearning  soul : 
Ulysses  straight  with  indignation  fir'd, 
(For  so  the  common  care  of  Greece  requir'd) 
Firm  to  his  lips  his  forceful  hands  applied, 
Till  on  his  tongue  the  fkitt'ring  murmurs  died. 
Meantime  Minerva  from  the  fraudful  horse 
Back  to  the  court  of  Priam  bent  your  course." 

"  Inclement  fate!  (Telemachus  replies) 
Frail  is  the  boasted  attribute  of  wise : 
The  leader,  mingling  with  the  vulgar  host, 
Is  in  the  common  mass  of  matter  lost ! 
But  now  let  sleep  the  painful  waste  repair 
Of  sad  reflection,  and  corroding  care." 

He  ceas'd  ;  the  menial  fair  that  round  her  wait 
At  Helen's  beck  prepare  the  room  of  state ; 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Beneath  an  ample  portico,  they  spread 

The  downy  fleece  to  form  the  slumb'rous  bed, 

And  o'er  soft  palls  of  purple  grain  unfold 

Rich  tapestry,  stiff  witli  inwoven  gold  : 

Then  through  th'  illumin'd  dome,  to  balmy  rest 

Th'  obsequious  herald  guides  each  princely  guest : 

While  to  his  regal  bower  the  king  ascends, 

And  beauteous  Helen  on  her  lord  attends. 

Soon  as  the  morn,  in  orient  purple  dress'd, 
Unbarr'd  the  portal  of  the  roseate  east, 
The  monarch  rose ;  magnificent  to  view, 
The  imperial  mantle  o'er  his  vest  he  threw ; 
The  glittering  zone  athwart  his  shoulder  cast, 
A  starry  falchion  low-depending  grac'd ; 
Clasp'd  on  his  feet  th'  embroider'd  sandals  shine ; 
And  forth  he  moves,  majestic  and  divine. 
Instant  to  young  Telemachus  he  press'd, 
And  thus  benevolent  his  speech  address'd : 

"  Say,  royal  youth,  sincere  of  soul,  report 
What  cause  hath  led  you  to  the  Spartan  court  ? 
Do  public  or  domestic  cares  constrain 
This  toilsome  voyage  o'er  the  surgy  main?" 

"  O  highly  favour'd  delegate  of  Jove ! 
(Replies  the  prince)  inflam'd  with  filial  love, 
And  anxious  hope,  to  hear  my  parent's  doom, 
A  suppliant  to  your  royal  court  I  come. 
Our  sovereign  seat  a  lewd  usurping  race 
With  lawless  riot  and  misrule  disgrace; 
To  pamper'd  insolence  devoted  fall 
Prime  of  the  flock,  and  choicest  of  the  stall : 
For  wild  ambition  wings  their  bold  desire, 
And  all  to  mount  th'  imperial  bed  aspire. 
But  prostrate  I  implore,  O  king !  relate 
The  mournful  series  of  my  father's  fate! 
Each  known  disaster  of  the  man  disclose. 
Born  by  his  mother  to  a  world  of  woes ! 


70 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


Recite  them !  nor  in  erring  pity  fear 
To  wound  with  storied  grief  the  filial  ear : 
If  e'er  Ulysses,  to  reclaim  your  right, 
Avow'd  his  zeal  in  council  or  in  fight, 
If  Phrygian  camps  the  friendly  toils  attest, 
To  the  sire's  merit  give  the  son's  request." 

Deep  from  his  inmost  soul  Atrides  sigh'd, 
And  thus  indignant  to  the  prince  replied  : 
"  Heavens  !  would  a  soft,  inglorious,  dastard  train 
An  absent  hero's  nuptial  joys  profane  ! 
So  with  her  young,  amid  the  woodland  shades, 
A  timorous  hind  the  lion's  court  invades, 
Leaves  in  the  fatal  lair  the  tender  fawns, 
Climbs  the  green  cliff,  or  feeds  the  flowery  lawns  : 
Meantime  return'd,  with  dire  remorseless  sway 
The  monarch- savage  rends  the  trembling  prey. 
With  equal  fury,  and  with  equal  fame, 
Ulysses  soon  shall  reassert  his  claim. 
O  Jove,  supreme,  whom  gods  and  men  revere  ! 
And  thou,  to  whom  'tis  given  to  gild  the  sphere  ! 
With  power  congenial  join'd,  propitious  aid 
The  chief  adopted  by  the  martial  maid  ! 
Such  to  our  wish  the  warrior  soon  restore, 
As  when  contending  on  the  Lesbian  shore 
His  prowess  Philomelides  confess'd, 
And  loud-acclaiming  Greeks  the  victor  bless'd  : 
Then  soon  th'  invaders  of  his  bed  and  throne, 
Their  love  presumptuous  shall  with  life  atone. 
With  patient  ear,  O  royal  youth,  attend 
The  storied  labours  of  thy  father's  friend : 
Fruitful  of  deeds,  the  copious  tale  is  long, 
But  truth  severe  shall  dictate  to  my  tongue; 
Learn  what  I  heard  the  sea-born  seer  relate, 
Whose  eye  can  pierce  the  dark  recess  of  fate. 

"  Long  on  th'  Egyptian  coast  by  calms  confin'd  ; 
Heaven  to  my  fleet  refus'd  a  prosperous  wind : 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


71 


No  vows  had  we  preferr'd,  nor  victim  slain ! 
For  this  the  gods  each  favouring  gale  restrain  : 
Jealous,  to  see  their  high  behests  obey'd; 
Severe,  if  men  th'  eternal  rites  evade. 
High  o'er  a  gulfy  sea,  the  Pharian  isle 
Fronts  the  deep  roar  of  disemboguing  Nile  : 
Her  distance  from  the  shore,  the  course  begun 
At  dawn,  and  ending  with  the  setting  sun, 
A  galley  measures  ;  when  the  stifler  gales 
Rise  on  the  poop,  and  fully  stretch  the  sails. 
There,  anchor'd  vessels  safe  in  harbour  lie, 
"While  limpid  springs  the  failing  cask  supply. 

"  And  now  the  twentieth  sun  descending,  laves 
His  glowing  axle  in  the  western  waves ; 
Still  with  expanded  sails  we  court  in  vain 
Propitious  winds  to  waft  us  o'er  the  main : 
And  the  pale  mariner  at  once  deplores 
His  drooping  vigour,  and  exhausted  stores, 
When  lo !  a  bright  coerulean  form  appears, 
The  fair  Eidothea !  to  dispel  my  fears ; 
Proteus  her  sire  divine.    With  pity  press'd, 
Me  sole  the  daughter  of  the  deep  address'd  ; 
What  time,  with  hunger  pin'd,  my  absent  mates 
Roam  the  wild  isle  in  search  of  rural  cates, 
Bait  the  barb'd  steel,  and  from  the  fishy  flood 
Appease  th'  afflictive  fierce  desire  of  food. 

'  Whoe'er  thou  art  (the  azure  goddess  cries) 
Thy  conduct  ill  deserves  the  praise  of  wise : 
Is  death  thy  choice,  or  misery  thy  boast, 
That  here  inglorious  on  a  barren  coast 
Thy  brave  associates  droop,  a  meagre  train, 
With  famine  pale,  and  ask  thy  care  in  vain?' 

"  Struck  with  the  kind  reproach,  I  straight  reply; 
Whate'er  thy  title  in  thy  native  sky, 
A  goddess  sure !  for  more  than  mortal  grace 
Speaks  thee  descendant  of  ethereal  race ; 


72 


THE  ODYSSEY, 


Book  4. 


Deem  not,  that  here  of  choice  my  fleet  remains ; 
Some  heavenly  power  averse  my  stay  constrains  : 
O,  piteous  of  my  fate,  vouchsafe  to  show 
(For  what's  sequester'd  from  celestial  view  1) 
What  power  becalms  th'  innavigable  seas  ? 
What  guilt  provokes  him,  and  what  vows  appease  1 

1 1 1  ceas'd ;  when  affable  the  goddess  cried  : 
1  Observe,  and  in  the  truths  1  speak  confide  : 
The  orac'lous  seer  frequents  the  Pharian  coast, 
From  whose  high  bed  my  birth  divine  1  boast ; 
Proteus,  a  name  tremendous  o'er  the  main, 
The  delegate  of  Neptune's  watery  reign. 
Watch  with  insidious  care  his  known  abode ; 
There  fast  in  chains  constrain  the  various  god: 
Who  bound,  obedient  to  superior  force, 
Unerring  will  prescribe  your  destin'd  course. 
If  studious  of  your  realms,  you  then  demand 
Their  state,  since  last  you  left  your  natal  land; 
Instant  the  god  obsequious  will  disclose 
Bright  tracts  of  glory,  or  a  cloud  of  woes.' 

"She  ceas'd,  and  suppliant  thus  I  made  reply: 
O  goddess  !  on  thy  aid  my  hopes  rely  ; 
Dictate,  propitious,  to  my  duteous  ear 
What  arts  can  captivate  the  changeful  seer : 
For  perilous  th'  essay,  unheard  the  toil, 
To  elude  the  prescience  of  a  god  by  guile. 

"  Thus  to  the  goddess  mild  my  suit  I  end. 
Then  she :  '  Obedient  to  my  rule,  attend : 
When  through  the  zone  of  heaven  the  mounted  sun 
Hath  journey'd  half,  and  half  remains  to  run  ; 
The  seer,  while  zephyrs  curl  the  swelling  deep, 
Basks  on  the  breezy  shore,  in  grateful  sleep, 
His  oozy  limbs.    Emerging  from  the  wave, 
The  Phocse  swift  surround  his  rocky  cave, 
Frequent  and  full ;  the  consecrated  train 
Of  her,*  whose  azure  trident  awes  the  main : 
*  Amphitrite. 


Book  4.  THE  ODYSSEY.  73 

There  wallowing  warm,  th'  enormous  herd  exhales 

An  oily  steam,  and  taints  the  noon-tide  gales. 

To  that  recess,  commodious  for  surprise, 

When  purple  light  shall  next  suffuse  the  skies, 

With  me  repair ;  and  from  thy  warrior  band 

Three  chosen  chiefs  of  dauntless  soul  command: 

Let  their  auxiliar  force  befriend  the  toil. 

For  strong  the  god,  and  perfected  in  guile. 

Stretch'd  on  the  shelly  shore,  he  first  surveys 

The  flouncing  herd  ascending  from  the  seas  ; 

Their  number  summ'd,  repos'd  in  sleep  profound 

The  scaly  charge  their  guardian  god  surround  : 

So  with  his  battening  flocks  the  careful  swain 

Abides,  pavilion'd  on  the  grassy  plain. 

With  powers  united,  obstinately  bold, 

Invade  him,  couch'd  amid  the  scaly  fold. 

Instant  he  wears,  elusive  of  the  rape, 

The  mimic  force  of  every  savage  shape : 

Or  glides  with  liquid  lapse  a  murmuring  stream, 

Or  wrapt  in  flame,  he  glows  at  every  limb. 

Yet  still  retentive,  with  redoubled  might 

Through  each  vain  passive  form  constrain  his  flight. 

But  when,  his  native  shape  resum'd,  he  stands 

Patient  of  conquest,  and  your  cause  demands ; 

The  cause  that  urg'd  the  bold  attempt  declare, 

And  sooth  the  vanquish'd  with  a  victor's  pray'r. 

The  bands  relax'd,  implore  the  seer  to  say 

What  godhead  interdicts  the  wat'ry  way  ? 

Who  straight  propitious,  in  prophetic  strain 

Will  teach  you  to  repass  th*  unmeasur'd  main.' 

She  ceas'd,  and  bounding  from  the  shelfy  shore,  [roar. 

Round  the  descending  nymph  the  waves  redounding 

"  High  wrapt  in  wonder  of  the  future  deed, 
With  joy  impetuous  to  the  port  I  speed : 
The  wants  of  nature  with  repast  suffice, 
Till  night  with  grateful  shade  involv'd  the  skies, 


74 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


And  shed  ambrosial  dews.    Past  by  the  deep, 
Along  the  tented  shore,  in  balmy  sleep, 
Our  cares  were  lost.    When  o'er  the  eastern  lawn, 
In  saffron  robes  the  daughter  of  the  dawn 
Advanc'd  her  rosy  steps  ;  before  the  bay, 
Due  ritual  honours  to  the  gods  I  pay  ; 
Then  seek  the  place  the  sea-born  nymph  assign'd, 
With  three  associates  of  undaunted  mind. 
Arriv'd,  to  form  along  th'  appointed  strand 
For  each  a  bed,  she  scoops  the  hilly  sand  : 
Then  from  her  azure  car  the  finny  spoils 
Of  four  vast  Phocre  takes,  to  veil  her  wiles : 
Beneath  the  finny  spoils  extended  prone, 
Hard  toil !  the  prophet's  piercing  eye  to  shun  ; 
New  from  the  corse,  the  scaly  frauds  diffuse 
Unsavoury  stench  of  oil,  and  brackish  ooze  . 
But  the  bright  sea-maid's  gentle  power  implor'd, 
With  nectar'd  drops  the  sickening  sense  restor'd. 

"  Thus  till  the  sun  had  travel'd  half  the  skies 
Ambush'd  we  lie,  and  wait  the  bold  emprise ; 
When  thronging  quick  to  bask  in  open  air, 
The  flocks  of  ocean  to  the  strand  repair  ; 
Couch'd  on  the  sunny  sand  the  monsters  sleep  : 
Then  Proteus,  mounting  from  the  hoary  deep, 
Surveys  his  charge,  unknowing  of  deceit : 
(In  order  told,  we  make  the  sum  complete) 
Pleas' d  with  the  false  review,  secure  he  lies, 
And  leaden  slumbers  press  his  drooping  eyes. 
Rushing  impetuous  forth,  we  straight  prepare 
A  furious  onset  with  the  sound  of  war, 
And  shouting  seize  the  god :  our  force  t'  evade 
His  various  arts  he  soon  resumes  in  aid : 
A  lion  now,  he  curls  a  surgy  mane  ; 
Sudden,  our  bands  a  spotted  pard  restrain  ; 
Then  arm'd  with  tusks,  and  lightening  in  his  eyes, 
A  boar's  obscener  shape  the  god  belies  : 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


On  spiry  volumes,  there  a  dragon  rides  ; 
Here,  from  our  strict  embrace  a  stream  he  glides ; 
And  last,  sublime  his  stately  growth  he  rears, 
A  tree,  and  well-dissembled  foliage  wears. 
Vain  efforts  !  with  superior  powers  compress'd, 
Me  with  reluctance  thus  the  seer  address'd  : 
*  Say,  son  of  Atreus,  say  what  god  inspir'd 
This  daring  fraud,  and  what  the  boon  desir'd  V 

<c  I  thus : — cO  thou,  whose  certain  eye  foresees 
The  fix'd  event  of  fate's  remote  decrees  ; 
After  long  woes,  and  various  toil  indur'd, 
Still  on  this  desert  isle  my  fleet  is  moor'd  ; 
Unfriended  of  the  gales.    All-knowing  !  say, 
What  godhead  interdicts  the  watery  way  1 
What  vows  repentant  will  the  power  appease, 
To  speed  a  prosperous  voyage  o'er  the  seas  V 

'  To  Jove  (with  stern  regard  the  god  replies) 
And  all  th'  offended  synod  of  the  skies, 
Just  hecatombs  with  due  devotion  slain, 
Thy  guilt  absolv'd,  a  prosperous  voyage  gain. 
To  the  firm  sanction  of  thy  fate  attend  ! 
An  exile  thou,  nor  cheering  face  of  friend, 
Nor  sight  of  natal  shore,  nor  regal  dome 
Shalt  yet  enjoy,  but  still  art  doom'd  to  roam. 
Once  more  the  Nile,  who  from  the  secret  source 
Of  Jove's  high  seat  descends  with  sweepy  force, 
Must  view  his  billows  white  beneath  thy  oar, 
And  altars  blaze  along  his  sanguine  shore. 
Then  will  the  gods,  with  holy  pomp  ador'd, 
To  thy  long  vows  a  safe  return  accord.'  , 

"  He  ceas'd  :  heart-wounded  with  afflictive  pain, 
(Doom'd  to  repeat  the  perils  of  the  main, 
A  shelfy  tract,  and  long !)  1  O  seer,  I  cry, 
To  the  stern  sanction  of  th'  offended  sky 
My  prompt  obedience  bows.    But  deign  to  say, 
What  fate  propitious,  or  what  dire  dismay 


76 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


Sustain  those  peers,  the  relics  of  our  host, 
Whom  1  with  Nestor  on  the  Phrygian  coast 
Embracing  left  %    Must  I  the  warriors  weep, 
Whelm'd  in  the  bottom  of  the  monstrous  deep  1 
Or  did  the  kind  domestic  friend  deplore 
The  breathless  heroes  on  their  native  shore  V 

1  Press  not  too  far,  (replied  the  god)  but  cease 
To  know,  what  known  will  violate  thy  peace : 
Too  curious  of  their  doom  !  with  friendly  wo 
Thy  breast  will  heave,  and  tears  eternal  flow. 
Part  live !  the  rest,  a  lamentable  train ! 
Range  the  dark  bounds  of  Pluto's  dreary  reign. 
Two,  foremost  in  the  roll  of  Mars  renown'd, 
Whose  arms  with  conquest  in  thy  cause  were  crown'd, 
Fell  by  disastrous  fate  :  by  tempest  tost, 
A  third  lives  wretched  on  a  distant  coast. 

'  By  Neptune  rescued  from  Minerva's  hate, 
On  Gyrae,  safe  Oilean  Ajax  sat. 
His  ship  o'er  whelm'd :  but  frowning  on  the  floods, 
Impious  he  roar'd  defiance  to  the  gods; 
To  his  own  prowess  all  the  glory  gave, 
The  power  defrauding  who  vouchsafe!  to  save. 
This  heard  the  raging  ruler  of  the  main  ; 
His  spear,  indignant  for  such  high  disdain, 
He  launch'd ;  dividing  with  his  Porky  mace 
Th'  aerial  summit  from  the  marble  base : 
The  rock  rush'd  sea-ward  with  impetuous  roar 
Ingulf 'd,  and  to  th'  abyss  the  boaster  bore. 

1  By  Juno's  guardian  aid,  the  wat'ry  vast, 
Secure  of  storms,  your  royal  brother  past ; 
Till  coasting  nigh  the  cape,  where  Malea  shrouds 
Her  spiry  cliffs  amid  surrounding  clouds, 
A  whirling  gust  tumultuous  from  the  shore, 
Across  the  deep  his  labouring  vessel  bore. 
In  an  ill-fated  hour  the  coast  he  gain'd, 
Where  late  in  regal  pomp  Thyestes  reign' d  j 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


But  when  his  hoary  honours  bow'd  to  fate, 
Egysthus  govern' d  in  paternal  state. 
The  surges  now  subside,  the  tempest  ends ; 
From  his  tall  ship  the  king  of  men  descends ; 
There  fondly  thinks  the  gods  conclude  his  toil : 
Far  from  his  own  domain  salutes  the  soil : 
With  rapture  oft  the  verge  of  Greece  reviews, 
And  the  dear  turf  with  tears  of  joy  bedews. 
Him  thus  exulting  on  the  distant  strand, 
A  spy  distinguish  d  from  his  airy  stand ; 
To  bribe  whose  vigilance,  Egysthus  told 
A  mighty  sum  of  ill  persuading  gold  : 
There  watch' d  this  guardian  of  his  guilty  fear, 
Till  the  twelfth  moon  had  wheel'd  her  pale  career ; 
And  now  admonish'd  by  his  eye,  to  court 
With  terror  wing'd  conveys  the  dread  report. 
Of  deathful  arts  expert,  his  lord  employs 
The  ministers  of  blood  in  dark  surprise"; 
And  twenty  youths  in  radiant  mail  incas'd, 
Close  ambush'd  nigh  the  spacious  hall  he  plac'd. 
Then  bids  prepare  the  hospitable  treat : 
Vain  shows  of  love  to  veil  his  felon-hate  ! 
To  grace  the  victor's  welcome  from  the  wars, 
A  train  of  coursers,  and  triumphal  cars, 
Magnificent  he  leads  :  the  royal  guest, 
Thoughtless  of  ill,  accepts  the  fraudful  feast. 
The  troop  forth  issuing  from  the  dark  recess, 
With  homicidal  rage  the  king  oppress  ! 
So,  whilst  he  feeds  luxurious  in  the  stall, 
The  sovereign  of  the  herd  is  doom'd  to  fall. 
The  partners  of  his  fame  and  toils  at  Troy, 
Around  their  lord,  a  mighty  ruin !  lie : 
Mix'd  with  the  brave,  the  base  invaders  bleed ; 
Egysthus  sole  survives  to  boast  the  deed.' 

"  He  said;  chill  horrors  shook  my  shivering  soul, 
Rack'd  with  convulsive  pangs  in  dust  I  roll ; 


78 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


And  hate,  in  madness  of  extreme  despair. 

To  view  the  sun,  or  breathe  the  vital  air  : 

But  when  superior  to  the  rage  of  wo, 

I  stood  restor'd,  and  tears  had  ceas'd  to  flow  ; 

Lenient  of  grief,  the  pitying  god  began — 

'  Forget  the  brother,  and  resume  the  man  : 

To  fate's  supreme  dispose  the  dead  resign, 

That  care  be  fate's,  a  speedy  passage  thine. 

Still  lives  the  wretch  who  wrought  the  death  deplor'd, 

But  lives  a  victim  for  thy  vengeful  sword ; 

Unless  with  filial  rage  Orestes  glow, 

And  swift  prevent  the  meditated  blow  : 

You  timely  will  return  a  welcome  guest, 

With  him  to  share  the  sad  funereal  feast.' 

"  He  said  :  new  thoughts  my  beating  heart  employ  > 
My  gloomy  soul  receives  a  gleam  of  joy. 
Fair  hope  revives ;  and  eager  I  address'd 
The  prescient  godhead  to  reveal  the  rest. 
1  The  doom  decreed  of  those  disastrous  two 
I've  heard  with  pain,  but  oh  !  the  tale  pursue ; 
What  third  brave  son  of  Mars  the  fates  constrain 
To  roam  the  howling  desert  of  the  main  : 
Or  in  eternal  shade  if  cold  he  lies, 
Provoke  new  sorrow  from  these  grateful  eyes.' 

1  That  chief  (rejoin'd  the  god)  his  race  derives 
From  Ithaca,  and  wondrous  woes  survives  ; 
Laertes'  son :  girt  with  circumfluous  tides, 
He  still  calamitous  constraint  abides. 
Him  in  Calypso's  cave  of  late  I  view'd, 
When  streaming  grief  his  faded  cheek  bedew'd. 
But  vain  his  prayer,  his  arts  are  vain,  to  move 
Th'  enamour'd  goddess,  or  elude  her  love  : 
His  vessel  sunk  and  dear  companions  lost, 
He  lives  reluctant  on  a  foreign  coast. 
But  oh,  belov'd  by  heaven  !  reserv'd  to  thee 
A  happier  lot  the  smiling  fates  decree  ! 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


79 


Free  from  that  law,  beneath  whose  mortal  sway 

Matter  is  chang'd,  and  varying  forms  decay, 

Elysium  shall  be  thine  ;  the  blissful  plains 

Of  utmost  earth,  where  Rhadamanthus  reigns. 

Joys  ever  young,  unmix'd  with  pain  or  fear, 

Fill  the  wide  circle  of  th'  eternal  year: 

Stern  winter  smiles  on  that  auspicious  clime : 

The  fields  are  florid  with  unfading  prime  : 

From  the  bleak  pole  no  winds  inclement  blow, 

Mould  the  round  hail,  or  flake  the  fleecy  snow ; 

But  from  the  breezy  deep  the  bless'd  inhale 

The  fragrant  murmurs  of  the  western  gale. 

This  grace  peculiar  will  the  gods  afford 

To  thee  the  son  of  Jove,  and  beauteous  Helen's  lord.' 

"  He  ceas'd,  and  plunging  in  that  vast  profound, 
Beneath  the  god  the  whirling  billows  bound. 
Then  speeding  back,  involv'd  in  various  thought, 
My  friends  attending  at  the  shore  I  sought. 
Arriv'd,  the  rage  of  hunger  we  control, 
Till  night  with  silent  shade  invests  the  pole ; 
Then  loose  the  cares  of  life  in  pleasing  rest : — 
Soon  as  the  morn  reveals  the  roseate  east, 
With  sails  we  wing  the  masts,  our  anchors  weigh, 
Unmoor  the  fleet,  and  rush  into  the  sea. 
Rang'd  on  the  banks,  beneath  our  equal  oars 
White  curl  the  waves,  and  the  vex'd  ocean  roars. 
Then  steering  backward  from  the  Pharian  isle, 
We  gain  the  stream  of  Jove-descended  Nile : 
There  quit  the  ships,  and  on  the  destin'd  shore 
With  ritual  hecatombs  the  gods  adore  : 
Their  wrath  aton'd,  to  Agamemnon's  name 
A  cenotaph  I  raise  of  deathless  fame. 
These  rites  to  piety  and  grief  discharg'd, 
The  friendly  gods  a  springing  gale  enlarg'd  : 
The  fleet  swift  tilting  o'er  the  surges  flew, 
Till  Grecian  cliffs  appear'd  a  blissful  view  : 


80 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


"  Thy  patient  ear  hath  heard  me  long  relate 
A  story,  fruitful  of  disastrous  fate  : 
And  now,  young  prince,  indulge  my  fond  request ; 
Be  Sparta  honour'd  with  his  royal  guest, 
Till  from  his  eastern  goal,  the  joyous  sun 
His  twelfth  diurnal  race  begins  to  run. 
Meantime  my  train  the  friendly  gifts  prepare, 
Three  sprightly  coursers,  and  a  polish'd  car : 
With  these,  a  goblet  of  capacious  mould, 
Figur'd  with  art  to  dignify  the  gold, 
(Form'd  for  libation  to  the  gods)  shall  prove 
A  pledge  and  monument  of  sacred  love." 

"  My  quick  return  (young  Ithacus  rejoin'd) 
Damps  the  warm  wishes  of  my  raptur'd  mind  : 
Did  not  my  fate  my  needful  haste  constrain, 
Charm'd  by  your  speech,  so  graceful  and  humane, 
Lost  in  delight  the  circling  year  would  roll, 
While  deep  attention  fix'd  my  listening  soul. 
But  now  to  Pyle  permit  my  destin'd  way, 
My  lov'd  associates  chide  my  long  delay  : 
In  dear  remembrance  of  your  royal  grace, 
I  take  the  present  of  the  promis'd  vase ; 
The  coursers  for  the  champaign  sports,  retain  ; 
That  gift  our  barren  rocks  will  render  vain  : 
Horrid  with  cliffs,  our  meagre  land  allows 
Thin  herbage  for  the  mountain  goat  to  browse, 
But  neither  mead  nor  plain  supplies,  to  feed 
The  sprightly  courser,  or  indulge  his  speed : 
To  sea-surrounded  realms  the  gods  assign 
Small  tract  of  fertile  lawn,  the  least  to  mine." 

His  hand  the  king  with  tender  passion  press'd, 
And  smiling,  thus  the  royal  youth  address'd  : 
"  O  early  worth !  a  soul  so  wise,  and  young, 
Proclaims  you  from  the  sage  Ulysses  sprung. 
Selected  from  my  stores,  of  matchles  price, 
An  urn  shall  recompense  your  prudent  choice ; 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Not  mean  the  massy  mould  of  silver  grac'd 
By  Vulcan's  art,  the  verge  with  gold  enchas'd  : 
A  pledge  the  sceptred  power  of  Sidon  gave, 
W  hen  to  his  realm  I  plough'd  the  orient  wave." 

Thus  they  alternate  ;  while  with  artful  care 
The  menial  train  the  regal  feast  prepare: 
The  firstlings  of  the  flock  are  doom'd  to  die; 
Rich  fragrant  wines  the  cheering  bowl  supply  ; 
A  female  band  the  gift  of  Ceres  bring ; 
And  the  gilt  roofs  with  genial  triumph  ring. 
Meanwhile,  in  Ithaca,  the  suitor  pow'rs 
In  active  games  divide  their  jovial  hours ; 
In  areas  varied  with  mosaic  art, 
Some  whirl  the  disk,  and  some  the  javelin  dart. 
Aside,  sequester'd  from  the  vast  resort, 
Antinous  sat  spectator  of  the  sport; 
With  great  Eurymachus,  of  worth  confess'd, 
And  high  descent,  superior  to  the  rest ; 
Whom  young  Noemon  lowly  thus  address'd  : 

"  My  ship  equipp:d  within  the  neighbouring  port 
The  prince,  departing  for  the  Pylian  court, 
Requested  for  his  speed  ;  but  courteous,  say 
When  steers  he  home,  or  why  this  long  delay  ? 
For  Elis  I  should  sail  with  utmost  speed, 
T'  import  twelve  mares  with  their  luxurious  feed, 
And  twelve  young  mules,  a  strong  laborious  race, 
New  to  the  plough,  unpractis'd  in  the  trace." 

Unknowing  of  the  course  to  Pyle  design'd, 
A  sudden  horror  seiz'd  on  either  mind  : 
The  prince  in  rural  bower  they  fondly  thought, 
Numbering  his  flocks  and  herds,  not  far  remote. 
"  Relate  (Antinous  cries,)  devoid  of  guile, 
When  spread  the  prince  his  sail  for  distant  Pyle? 
Did  chosen  chiefs  across  the  gulfy  main 
Attend  his  voyage,  or  domestic  train  % 
F 


82 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


Spontaneous  did  you  speed  his  secret  course, 
Or  was  the  vessel  seiz'd  hy  fraud  or  force  1" 

"  With  willing  duty,  not  reluctant  mind, 
(Noemon  cried)  the  vessel  was  resign'd. 
Who  in  the  balance,  with  the  great  affairs 
Of  courts,  presume  to  weigh  their  private  cares  1 
With  him,  the  peerage  next  in  power  to  you  ; 
And  Mentor,  captain  of  the  lordly  crew, 
Or  some  celestial  in  his  reverend  form, 
Safe  from  the  secret  rock  and  adverse  storm, 
Pilots  the  course  :  for  when  the  glimmering  ray 
Of  y ester  dawn  disclos'd  the  tender  day, 
Mentor  himself  I  saw,  and  much  admir'd  — 
Then  ceas'd  the  youth,  and  from  the  court  retir'd. 

Confounded  and  appall'd,  th'  unfinish'd  game 
The  suitors  quit,  and  all  to  council  came  : 
Antinous  first  th'  assembled  peers  address'd, 
Rage  sparkling  in  his  eyes,  and  burning  in  his  breast. 

M  O  shame  to  manhood  !  shall  one  daring  boy 
The  scheme  of  all  our  happiness  destroy  1 
Fly  unperceiv'd,  seducing  half  the  flower 
Of  nobles,  and  invite  a  foreign  power  ? 
The  ponderous  engine  rais'd  to  crush  us  all, 
Recoi.ing,  on  his  head  is  sure  to  fall. 
Instant  prepare  me,  on  the  neighbouring  strand, 
With  twenty  chosen  mates  a  vessel  mann'd  ; 
For  ambush'd  close  beneath  the  Samian  shore 
His  ship  returning  shall  my  spies  explore: 
He  soon  his  rashness  shall  with  life  atone, 
Seek  for  his  fatber's  fate,  but  find  his  own." 

With  vast  applause  the  sentence  all  approve; 
Then  rise,  and  to  the  feastful  hall  remove  : 
Swift  to  the  queen  the  herald  Medon  ran, 
Who  heard  the  consult  of  the  dire  divan: 
Before  her  dome  the  royal  matron  stands, 
And  thus  the  message  of  his  haste  demands  : 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


"  What  will  the  suitors  ?  must  my  servant  train 
Th'  allotted  labours  of  the  day  refrain, 
For  them  to  form  some  exquisite  repast  1 
Heaven  grant  this  festival  may  prove  their  last ! 
Or  if  they  still  must  live,  from  me  remove 
The  double  plague  of  luxury  and  love  ! 
Forbear,  ye  sons  of  indolence  !  forbear, 
In  riot  to  consume  a  wretched  heir. 
In  the  young  soul  illustrious  thought  to  raise, 
Were  ye  not  tutor'd  with  Ulysses'  praise  1 
Have  not  your  fathers  oft  my  lord  defin'd, 
Gentle  of  speech,  benificent  of  mind  1 
Some  kings  with  arbitrary  rage  devour, 
Or  in  their  tyrant  minions  vest  the  pow'r: 
Ulysses  let  no  partial  favours  fall, 
The  people's  parent,  he  protected  all  : 
But  absent  now,  perfidious  and  ingrate ! 
His  stores  ye  ravage,  and  usurp  his  state." 

He  thus  :  "  O  were  the  woes  you  speak  the  worst 
They  form  a  deed  more  odious  and  accurs'd  ; 
More  dreadful  than  your  boding  soul  divines  : 
But  pitying  Jove  avert  the  dire  designs! 
The  darling  object  of  your  royal  care 
Is  mark'd  to  perish  in  a  deathful  snare  ; 
Before  he  anchors  in  his  native  port, 
From  Pyle  resailing  and  the  Spartan  court ; 
Horrid  to  speak  !  in  ambush  is  decreed 
The  hope  and  heir  of  Ithaca  to  bleed  !" 

Sudden  she  sunk  beneath  the  weighty  woes, 
The  vital  streams  a  chilling  horror  froze  : 
The  big  round  tear  stands  trembling  in  her  eye, 
And  on  her  tongue  imperfect  accents  die. 
At  length,  in  tender  language,  intervove 
With  sighs,  she  thus  express'd  her  anxious  love  : 
"Why  rashly  would  my  son  his  fate  explore, 
Ride  the  wild  waves,  and  quit  the  safer  shore  ? 


S4 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


Did  he,  with  all  the  greatly  wretched,  crave 
A  blank  oblivion,  and  a  friendly  grave  V* 

"  Tis  not  (replied  the  sage)  to  Medon  given 
To  know,  if  some  inhabitant  of  heaven 
In  his  young  breast  the  daring  thought  inspir'd, 
Or  if  alone,  with  filial  duty  fir'd, 
The  winds  and  waves  he  tempts  in  early  bloom, 
Studious  to  learn  bis  absent  father's  doom." 

The  sage  retir'd  :  unable  to  control 
The  mighty  griefs  that  swell  her  labouring  soul, 
Rolling  convulsive  on  the  floor,  is  seen 
The  piteous  object  of  a  prostrate  queen. 
Words  to  her  dumb  complaint  a  pause  supplies, 
And  breath,  to  waste  in  unavailing  cries. 
Around  their  sovereign  wept  the  menial  fair, 
To  whom  she  thus  address'd  her  deep  despair: 

"  Behold  a  wretch  whom  all  the  gods  consign 
To  wo  !  Did  ever  sorrows  equal  mine  1 
Long  to  my  joys  my  dearest  lord  is  lost, 
His  country's  buckler,  and  the  Grecian  boast: 
2Now  from  my  fond  embrace,  by  tempests  torn, 
Our  other  column  of  the  state  is  borne : 
Nor  took  a  kind  adieu,  nor  sought  consent ! — 
Unkind  confederates  in  his  dire  intent ! 
Ill  suits  it  with  your  shows  of  duteous  zeal, 
From  me  the  purpos'd  voyage  to  conceal : 
Though  at  the  solemn  midnight  hour  he  rose, 
Why  did  you  fear  to  trouble  my  repose  1 
He  either  had  obey'd  my  fond  desire, 
Or  seen  his  mother  pierc'd  with  grief  expire. 
Bid  Dolius  quick  attend,  the  faithful  slave 
Whom  to  my  nuptial  train  Icarius  gave, 
T'  attend  the  fruit-groves  :  with  incessant  speed 
He  shall  this  violence  of  death  decreed, 
To  good  Laertes  tell.    Experienc'd  age 
May  timely  intercept  the  ruffian-rage. 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Convene  the  tribes,  the  murderous  plot  reveal, 
And  to  their  power  to  save  his  race  appeal." 

Then  Euryclea  thus  :  "  My  dearest  dread  ! 
Though  to  the  sword  I  bow  this  hoary  head, 
Or  if  a  dungeon  be  the  pain  decreed, 
I  own  me  concious  of  th'  unpleasing  deed  : 
Auxiliar  to  his  flight,  my  aid  implor'd, 
With  wine  and  viands  I  the  vessel  stor'd : 
A  solemn  oath  impos'd,  the  secret  seal'd, 
Till  the  twelfth  dawn  the  light  of  heaven  reveal'd. 
Dreading  th'  effect  of  a  fond  mother's  fear, 
He  dar'd  not  violate  your  royal  ear. 
But  bathe,  and  in  imperial  robes  array'd, 
Pay  due  devotions  to  the  martial  maid, 
And  rest  affianc'd  in  her  guardian  aid. 
Send  not  to  good  Laertes,  nor  engage 
In  toils  of  state  the  miseries  of  age  : 
'Tis  impious  to  surmise,  the  powers  divine 
To  ruin  doom  the  Jove-descended  line : 
Long  shall  the  race  of  just  Arcesius  reign, 
And  isles  remote  enlarge  his  old  domain." 

The  queen  her  speech  with  calm  attention  hears, 
Her  eyes  restrain  the  silver-streaming  tears  : 
She  bathes,  and,  rob'd,  the  sacred  dome  ascends : 
Her  pious  speed  a  female  train  attends : 
The  salted  cakes  in  canisters  are  laid, 
And  thus  the  queen  invokes  Minerva's  aid  : 

"  Daughter  divine  of  Jove  !  whose  arm  can  wield 
Th'  avenging  bolt,  and  shake  the  dreadful  shield  ! 
If  e'er  Ulysses  to  thy  fane  preferr'd 
The  best  and  choicest  of  his  flock  and  herd  ; 
Hear,  goddess,  hear,  by  those  oblations  won ; 
And  for  the  pious  sire  preserve  the  son  : 
His  wish'd  return  with  happy  power  befriend, 
And  on  the  suitors  let  thy  wrath  descend  !'' 


86 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


She  ceas'd ;  shrill  ecstasies  of  joy  declare 
The  favouring  goddess  present  to  the  pray'r  : 
The  suitors  heard,  and  deemed  the  mirthful  voice 
A  signal  of  her  hymenaeal  choice ; 
Whilst  one  most  jovial  thus  accosts  the  board  : 

u  Too  late  the  queen  selects  a  second  lord : 
In  evil  hour  the  nuptial  rite  intends, 
When  o'er  her  son  disastrous  death  impends." 

Thus  he  unskill'd  of  what  the  fates  provide. 
But  with  severe  rebuke  Antinous  cried  : 

"  These  empty  vaunts  will  make  the  voyage  vain  > 
Alarm  not  with  discourse  the  menial  train  : 
The  great  event  with  silent  hope  attend; 
Our  deeds  alone  our  counsel  must  commend." 

His  speech  thus  ended  short,  he  frowning  rose, 
And  twenty  chiefs  renown'd  for  valour  chose  : 
Down  to  the  strand  he  speeds  with  haughty  strides ; 
Where  anchor'd  in  the  bay  the  vessel  rides, 
Replete  with  mail  and  military  store, 
In  all  her  tackle  trim  to  quit  the  shore. 
The  desperate  crew  ascend,  unfurl  the  sails  • 
(The  sea-ward  prow  invites  the  tardy  gales) 
Then  take  repast,  till  Hesperus  display'd 
His  golden  circlet  in  the  western  shade. 

Meantime  the  queen  without  refection  due, 
Heart-wounded,  to  the  bed  of  state  withdrew  : 
In  her  sad  breast  the  prince's  fortunes  roll, 
And  hope  and  doubt  alternate  seize  her  soul. 
So  when  the  woodman's  toil  her  cave  surrounds. 
And  with  the  hunter's  cry  the  grove  resounds; 
With  grief  and  rage  the  mother-lion  stung, 
Fearless  herself,  yet  trembles  for  her  young. 

While  pensive  in  the  silent  slumbrous  shade, 
Sleep's  gentle  powers  her  drooping  eyes  invade  ; 
Minerva,  life-like  on  embodied  air 
lmpress'd  the  form  of  Iphthima  the  fair  : 


Book  4. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


(Icarius'  daughter  she,  whose  blooming  charms 

Allur'd  Eumelus  to  tier  virgin  arms: 

A  sceptred  lord,  who  e'er  the  fruitful  plain 

Of  Thessaly,  wide  stretch'd  his  ample  reign) 

As  Pallas  will'd,  along  the  sable  skies 

To  calm  the  queen  the  phantom-sister  flies. 

Swift  on  the  regal  dome  descending  right, 

The  bolted  valves  are  pervious  to  her  flight. 

Close  to  her  head  the  pleasing  vision  stands, 

And  thus  performs  Minerva's  high  commands : 

"  0  why,  Penelope,  this  causeless  fear, 
To  render  sleep's  soft  blessing  insincere  1 
Alike  devote  to  sorrow's  dire  extreme 
The  day  reflection,  and  the  midnight  dream  ! 
Thy  son,  the  gods  propitious  will  restore, 
And  bid  thee  cease  his  absence  to  deplore." 

To  whom  the  queen,  whilst  yet  her  pensive  mind 
Was  in  the  silent  gates  of  sleep  confin'd  : 
11  O  sister,  to  my  soul  for  ever  dear, 
Why  this  first  visit  to  reprove  my  fear  1 
How  in  a  realm  so  distant  should  you  know 
From  what  deep  source  my  ceaseless  sorrows  flow  ] 
To  all  my  hope  my  royal  lord  is  lost, 
His  country's  buckler,  and  the  Grecian  boast; 
And  with  consummate  wo  to  weigh  me  down, 
The  heir  of  all  his  honours,  and  his  crown, 
My  darling  son  is  fled !  an  easy  prey 
To  the  fierce  storms,  or  men  more  fierce  than  they  ; 
Who,  in  a  league  of  blood  associates  sworn, 
Will  intercept  th'  unwary  youth's  return." 

"  Courage  resume  (the  shadowy  form  replied,) 
In  the  protecting  care  of  heaven  confide : 
On  him  attends  the  blue-ey'd  martial  maid  ; 
What  earthly  can  implore  a  surer  aid  1 
Me  now  the  guardian  goddess  deigns  to  send, 
To  bid  thee  patient  his  return  attend." 


88 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  4. 


The  queen  replies  :  "  If  in  the  bless'd  abodes, 
A  goddess,  thou  hast  commerce  with  the  gods ; 
Say,  breathes  my  lord  the  blissful  realm  of  light, 
Or  lies  he  wrapt  in  ever  during  night?" 

"  Inquire  not  of  his  doom  (the  phantom  cries,) 
1  speak  not  all  the  counsel  of  the  skies ; 
Nor  must  indulge  with  vain  discourse,  or  long, 
The  windy  satisfaction  of  the  tongue." 

Swift  through  the  valves  the  visionary  fair 
Repass'd,  and  viewless  mix'd  with  common  air. 
The  queen  awakes,  deliver'd  of  her  woes: 
With  florid  joy  her  heart  dilating  glows : 
The  vision,  manifest  of  future  fate, 
Makes  her  with  hope  her  son's  arrival  wait. 

Meantime  the  suitors  plough  the  wat'ry  plain, 
Telemachus  in  thought  already  slain  ! 
When  sight  of  lessening  Ithaca  was  lost, 
Their  sail  directed  for  the  Sarnian  coast, 
A  small  hut  verdant  isle  appear'd  in  view, 
And  Asteris  th'  advancing  pilot  knew  : 
An  ample  port  thy  rocks  projected  form, 
To  break  the  rolling  waves,  and  ruffling  storm : 
That  safe  recess  they  gain  with  happy  speed, 
And  in  close  ambush  wait  the  murderous  deed. 


BOOK  V. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE  DEPARTURE  OF  ULYSSES  FROM  CALYPSO. 

PALLAS,  in  a  council  of  the  gods,  complains  of  the  detention  of 
Ulysses  in  the  island  of  Calypso;  whereupon  Mercury  is  sent  to 
command  his  removal.  The  seat  of  Calypso  described.  She  con- 
sents with  much  difficulty,  and  Ulysses  builds  a  vessel  with  his 
own  hands,  on  which  he  embarks.  Neptune  overtakes  him  with 
a  terrible  tempest,  in  which  he  is  shipwrecked,  and  in  the  last 
danger  of  death ;  till  Leucothea,  a  sea-goddess,  assists  him,  and 
after  innumerable  perils  he  gets  ashore  on  Phaeacia. 

The  saffron  morn,  with  early  blushes  spread, 
Now  rose  refulgent  from  Tithonus'  bed  ; 
With  new-born  day  to  gladden  mortal  sight, 
And  gild  the  courts  of  heaven  with  sacred  light. 
Then  met  th'  eternal  synod  of  the  sky,  5 
Before  the  god  who  thunders  from  on  high,  > 
Supreme  in  might,  sublime  in  majesty.  ) 
Pallas,  to  these,  deplores  th'  unequal  fates 
Of  wise  Ulysses,  and  his  toils  relates  ; 
Her  hero's  danger  touch' d  the  pitying  power, 
The  nymph's  seducements,  and  the  magic  bower. 

Thus  she  began  her  plaint : — "  Immortal  Jove  ! 
And  you  who  till  the  blissful  seats  above ! 


90 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  5. 


Let  kings  no  more  with  gentle  mercy  sway, 

Or  bless  a  people  willing  to  obey, 

But  crush  the  nations  with  an  iron  rod, 

And  every  monarch  be  the  scourge  of  God, 

If  from  your  thoughts  Ulysses  you  remove, 

Who  rul'd  his  subjects  with  a  father's  love. 

Sole  in  an  isle,  encircled  by  the  main, 

Abandon'd,  banish'd  from  his  native  reign 

Unbless'd  he  sighs,  detain'd  by  lawless  charms, 

And  press'd  unwilling  in  Calypso's  arms. 

Nor  friends  are  there,  nor  vessels  to  convey, 

Nor  oars  to  cut  th'  immeasurable  way. 

And  now  fierce  traitors,  studious  to  destroy 

His  only  son,  their  ambush'd  fraud  employ; 

Who,  pious,  following  his  great  father's  fame, 

To  sacred  Pylos  and  to  Sparta  came."  [forms 

"What  words  are  these'?   (replied  the  power  who 
The  clouds  of  night,  and  darkens  heaven  with  storms) 
Is  not  already  in  thy  soul  decreed, 
The  chief's  return  shall  make  the  guilty  bleed? 
What  cannot  wisdom  do?    Thou  may'st  restore 
The  son  in  safety  to  his  native  shore  ; 
While  the  fell  foes  who  late  in  ambush  lay, 
With  fraud  defeated,  measure  back  their  way." 

Then  thus  to  Hermes  the  command  was  given : 
"  Hermes,  thou  chosen  messenger  of  heaven ! 
Go,  to  the  nymph  be  these  our  orders  borne : 
'Tis  Jove's  decree  Ulysses  shall  return  ; 
The  patient  man  shall  view  his  old  abodes, 
Nor  help'd  by  mortal  hand,  nor  guiding  gods; 
In  twice  ten  days  shall  fertile  Scheria  find, 
Alone,  and  floating  to  the  wave  and  wind. 
The  bold  Phasacians  there,  whose  haughty  line 
Is  mix'd  with  gods,  half  human,  half  divine, 
The  chief  shall  honour  as  some  heavenly  guest> 
And  swift  transport  him  to  his  place  of  rest. 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


1)1 


His  vessels  loaded  with  a  plenteous  store 
Of  brass,  of  vestures,  and  resplendent  ore, 
(A  richer  prize  than  if  his  joyful  isle 
Reeeiv'd  him  charg'd  with  1  lion's  noble  spoil,) 
His  friends,  his  country,  he  shall  see,  though  late ; 
Such  is  our  sovereign  will,  and  such  is  fate." 

He  spoke.    The  god  who  mounts  the  winged  winds 
Fast  to  his  feet  the  golden  pinions  binds, 
That  high  through  fields  of  air  his  flight  sustain 
O'er  the  wide  earth,  and  o'er  the  boundless  main. 
He  grasps  the  wand  that  causes  sleep  to  fly, 
Or  in  soft  slumber  seals  the  wakeful  eye ; 
Then  shoots  from  heaven  to  high  Pieria's  steep, 
And  stoops  incumbent  on  the  rolling  deep. 
So  watery  fowl,  that  seek  their  fishy  food, 
With  wings  expanded  o'er  the  foaming  flood, 
Now  sailing  smooth  the  level  surface  sweep, 
Now  dip  their  pinions  in  the  briny  deep. 
Thus  o'er  the  world  of  waters  Hermes  flew, 
Till  now  the  distant  island  rose  in  view : 
Then  swift  ascending  from  the  azure  wave, 
He  took  the  path  that  winded  to  the  cave. 
Large  was  the  grot  in  which  the  nymph  he  found, 
(The  fair-hair'd  nymph  with  every  beauty  crown'd) 
She  sat  and  sung;  the  rocks  resound  her  lays  : 
The  cave  was  brighten'd  with  a  rising  blaze: 
Cedar  and  frankincense,  an  odorous  pile, 
Flam'd  on  the  hearth,  and  wide  perfum'd  the  isle; 
While  she  with  work  and  song  the  time  divides, 
And  through  the  loom  the  golden  shuttle  guides. 
Without  the  grot,  a  various  sylvan  scene 
Appear'd  around,  and  groves  of  living  green; 
Poplars  and  alders  ever  quivering  play'd, 
And  nodding  cypress  form'd  a  fragrant  shade  ; 
On  whose  high  branches,  waving  with  the  storm, 
The  birds  of  broadest  wing  their  mansion  form. 


92 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  5. 


The  chough,  the  sea-mew,  the  loquacious  crow, 
And  scream  aloft,  and  skim  the  deeps  below. 
Depending  vines  the  shelving  cavern  screen, 
With  purple  clusters  blushing  through  the  green. 
Four  limpid  fountains  from  the  clefts  distil,  } 
And  every  fountain  pours  a  sev'ral  rill,  > 
In  mazy  windings  wandering  down  the  hill :  } 
Where  bloomy  meads  with  vivid  greens  were  crown'd, 
And  glowing  violets  threw  odours  round. 
A  scene,  where,  if  a  god  should  cast  his  sight, 
A  god  might  gaze,  and  wander  with  delight ! 
Joy  touch'd  the  messenger  of  heaven:  he  stay'd 
Entranc'd,  and  all  the  blissful  haunt  survey'd. 
Him,  entering  in  the  cave,  Calypso  knew ; 
For  powers  celestial  to  each  other's  view 
Stand  still  confess'd,  though  distant  far  they  lie 
To  habitants  of  earth,  or  sea,  or  sky. 
But  sad  Ulysses,  by  himself  apart, 
Pour'd  the  big  sorrows  of  his  swelling  heart ; 
'All  on  the  lonely  shore  he  sat  to  weep, 
And  roll'd  his  eyes  around  the  restless  deep ; 
Toward  his  lov'd  coast  he  roll'd  his  eyes  in  vain, 
Till,  dimm'd  with  rising  grief,  they  stream'd  again. 

Now  graceful  seated  on  her  shining  throne, 
To  Hermes  thus  the  nymph  divine  begun  : 

"God  of  the  golden  wand!  on  what  behest 
Arriv'st  thou  here,  an  unexpected  guest? 
Lov'd  as  thou  art,  thy  free  injunctions  lay ; 
'Tis  mine,  with  joy  and  duty  to  obey. 
Till  now  a  stranger,  in  a  happy  hour 
Approach,  and  taste  the  dainties  of  my  bow'r." 

Thus  having  spoke,  the  nymph  the  table  spread : 
(Ambrosial  cates,  with  nectar  rosy-red) 
Hermes  the  hospitable  rite  partook, 
Divine  refection !  then,  recruited,  spoke. 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


93 


"What  mov'd  this  journey  from  my  native  sky, 
A  goddess  asks,  nor  can  a  god  deny ; 
Hear  then  the  truth  :  By  mighty  Jove's  command, 
Unwilling,  have  I  trod  this  pleasing  land  ; 
For  who,  self-mov'd,  with  weary  wing  would  sweep 
Such  length  of  ocean  and  unmeasur'd  deep  ; 
A  world  of  waters !  far  from  all  the  ways 
Where  men  frequent,  or  sacred  altars  blaze  1 
But  to  Jove's  will  submission  we  must  pay  ; 
What  power  so  great,  to  dare  to  disobey  ? 
A  man,  he  says,  a  man  resides  with  thee, 
Of  all  his  kind  most  worn  with  misery. 
The  Greeks  (whose  arms  for  nine  long  years  employ'd 
Their  force  on  Ilion,  in  the  tenth  destroy'd) 
At  length  embarking  in  a  luckless  hour, 
With  conquest  proud,  incens'd  Minerva's  pow'r: 
Hence  on  the  guilty  race  her  vengeance  hurl'd, 
With  storms  pursued  them  through  the  liquid  world. 
There  all  his  vessels  sunk  beneath  the  wave ! 
There  all  his  dear  companions  found  their  grave ! 
Sav'd  from  the  jaws  of  death  by  heaven's  decree, 
The  tempest  drove  him  to  these  shores  and  thee. 
Him,  Jove  now  orders  to  his  native  lands 
Straight  to  dismiss  ;  so  destiny  commands  : 
Impatient  fate  his  near  return  attends, 
And  calls  him  to  his  country,  and  his  friends." 

E'en  to  her  inmost  soul  the  goddess  shook ; 
Then  thus  her  anguish  and  her  passion  broke  : 
"  Ungracious  gods  !  with  spite  and  envy  curst ! 
Still  to  your  own  ethereal  race  the  worst ! 
Ye  envy  mortal  and  immortal  joy, 
And  love,  the  only  sweet  of  life,  destroy. 
Did  ever  goddess  by  her  charms  engage 
A  favour'd  mortal,  and  not  feel  your  rage  ? 
So  when  Aurora  sought  Orion's  love, 
Her  joys  disturb'd  your  blissful  hours  above, 


94 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  5. 


Till  in  Ortygia,  Dian's  winged  dart 

Had  pierc'd  the  hapless  hunter  to  the  heart. 

So  when  the  covert  of  the  thrice-ear'd  field 

Saw  stately  Ceres  to  her  passion  yield, 

Scarce  could  Iasion  taste  her  heavenly  charms, 

But  Jove's  swift  lightning  scorch'd  him  in  her  arms. 

And  is  it  now  my  turn,  ye  mighty  powers  ! 

Am  I  the  envy  of  your  blissful  bowers  1 

A  man,  an  outcast  to  the  storm  and  wave, 

It  was  my  crime  to  pity,  and  to  save, 

When  he  who  thunders  rent  his  bark  in  twain, 

And  sunk  his  brave  companions  in  the  main. 

Alone,  abandon'd,  in  mid-ocean  toss'd, 

The  sport  of  winds,  and  driv'n  from  every  coast, 

Hither  this  man  of  miseries  I  led, 

Receiv'd  the  friendless,  and  the  hungry  fed  ; 

Nay  promis'd  (vainly  prornis'd  !)  to  bestow 

Immortal  life,  exempt  from  age  and  wo. 

'Tis  past  and  Jove  decrees  he  shall  remove; 

Gods  as  we  are,  we  are  but  slaves  to  Jove. 
Go  then  he  may ;  (he  must  if  he  ordain, 
Try  all  those  dangers,  all  those  deeps,  again) 
But  never,  never  shall  Calypso  send 
To  toils  like  these,  her  husband  and  her  friend. 
What  ships  have  I,  what  sailors  to  convey, 
What  oars  to  cut  the  long  laborious  way  7 
Yet  I'll  direct  the  safest  means  to  go: 
That  last  advice  is  all  I  can  bestow." 

To  her  the  power  who  bears  the  charming  rod  : 
£{  Dismiss  the  man,  nor  irritate  the  god  ; 
Prevent  the  rage  of  him  who  reigns  above, 
For  what  so  dreadful  as  the  wrath  of  Jove  V 
Thus  having  said,  he  cut  the  cleaving  sky, 
And  in  a  moment  vanish'd  from  her  eye. 
The  nymph,  obedient  to  divine  command, 
To  seek  Ulysses,  pac'd  along  the  sand  : 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Him  pensive  on  the  lonely  beach  she  found, 

With  streaming  eyes  in  briny  torrents  drown'd, 

And  inly  pining  for  his  native  shore  ; 

For  now  the  soft  enchantress  pleas'd  no  more: 

For  now,  reluctant,  and  constraint  by  charms, 

Absent  he  lay  in  her  desiring  arms, 

In  slumber  wore  the  heavy  night  away, 

On  rocks  and  shores  consum'd  the  tedious  day ; 

There  sat  all  desolate,  and  sigh'd  alone, 

With  echoing  sorrows  made  the  mountains  groan, 

And  roll'd  his  eyes  o'er  all  the  restless  main, 

Till,  dimm'd  with  rising  grief,  they  stream'd  again. 

Here,  on  the  musing  mood  the  goddess  press'd, 
Approaching  soft;  and  thus  the  chief  address'd: 
"  Unhappy  man!  to  wasting  woes  a  prey, 
No  more  in  sorrows  languish  life  away: 
Free  as  the  winds  I  give  thee  now  to  rove — 
Go,  fell  the  timber  of  yon  lofty  grove, 
And  form  a  Taft,  and  build  the  rising  ship, 
Sublime  to  bear  thee  o'er  the  gloomy  deep. 
To  store  the  vessel  let  the  care  be  mine, 
With  water  from  the  rock,  and  rosy  wine, 
And  life-sustaining  bread,  and  fair  array, 
And  prosperous  gales  to  waft  thee  on  the  way. 
These  if  the  gods  with  my  desiies  comply, 
(The  gods,  alas  !  more  mighty  far  than  1, 
And  better  skill'd  in  dark  events  to  come) 
In  peace  shall  land  thee  at  thy  native  home." 

With  sighs,  Ulysses  heard  the  words  she  spoke, 
Then  thus  his  melancholy  silence  broke; 
"  Some  other  motive,  goddess  !  sways  thy  mind, 
Some  close  design,  or  turn  of  womankind, 
Nor  my  return  the  end,  nor  this  the  way, 
On  a  slight  raft  to  pass  the  swelling  sea, 
Huge,  horrid,  vast!  where  scarce  in  safety  sails 
The  best  built  ship,  though  Jove  inspire  the  gales, 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  5. 


The  bold  proposal  how  shall  I  fulfil ; 

Dark  as  I  am,  unconcious  of  thy  will  ? 

Swear  then,  thou  mean'st  not  what  my  soul  forebodes  ; 

Swear  by  the  solemn  oath  that  bind  the  gods  P 

Him,  while  he  spoke,  with  smiles  Calypso  ey'd. 
And  gently  grasp'd  his  hand,  and  thus  replied  : 
"  This  shows  thee,  friend,  by  old  experience  taught, 
And  learn'd  in  all  the  wiles  of  human  thought, 
How  prone  to  doubt,  how  cautious  are  the  wise  1 
But  hear,  O  earth,  and  hear,  ye  sacred  skies! 
And  thou,  O  Styx  !  whose  formidable  floods 
Glide  through  the  shades,  and  bind  th'  attesting  gods  ! 
No  form'd  design,  no  meditated  end 
Lurks  in  the  counsel  of  thy  faithful  friend ; 
Kind  the  persuasion,  and  sincere  my  aim ; 
The  same  my  practice,  were  my  fate  the  same. 
Heaven  has  not  curs'd  me  with  a  heart  of  steel, 
But  given  the  sense,  to  pity,  and  to  feel." 

Thus  having  said,  the  goddess  march'd  before: 
He  trod  her  footsteps  in  the  sandy  shore. 
At  the  cool  cave  arriv'd,  they  took  their  state ; 
He  fill'd  the  throne  where  Mercury  had  sat; 
For  him,  the  nymph  a  rich  repast  ordains, 
Such  as  the  mortal  life  of  man  sustains ; 
Before  herself  were  plac'd  the  cates  divine, 
Ambrosial  banquet,  and  celestial  wine. 
Their  hunger  satiate,  and  their  thirst  repress'd, 
Thus  spoke  Calypso  to  her  godlike  guest : 

"  Ulysses !  (with  a  sigh  she  thus  began) 
O  sprung  from  gods  !  in  wisdom  more  than  man  ! 
Is  then  thy  home  the  passion  of  thy  heart  1 
Thus  wilt  thou  leave  me,  are  we  thus  to  part  1 
Farewell !  and  ever  joyful  may'st  thou  be, 
Nor  break  the  transport  with  one  thought  of  me. 
But  ah,  Ulysses !  wert  thou  given  to  know 
What  fate  yet  dooms  thee,  yet,  to  undergo  ; 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


97 


Thy  heart  might  settle  in  this  scene  of  ease, 

And  e'en  these  slighted  charms  might  learn  to  please. 

A  willing  goddess,  and  immortal  life, 

Might  banish  from  thy  mind  an  absent  wife. 

Am  I  inferior  to  a  mortal  dame  ? 

Less  soft  my  features,  less  august  my  frame  7 

Or  shall  the  daughters  of  mankind  compare 

Their  earth-born  beauties  with  the  heavenly  fair  V1 

"  Alas  !  for  this  (the  prudent  man  replies) 
Against  Ulysses  shall  thy  anger  rise  ? 
Lov'd  and  ador'd,  O  goddess !  as  thou  art, 
Forgive  the  weakness  of  a  human  heart. 
Though  well  I  see  thy  graces  far  above 
The  dear,  though  mortal,  object  of  my  love, 
Of  youth  eternal  well  the  difference  know, 
And  the  short  date  of  fading  charms  below ; 
Yet  every  day,  while  absent  thus  I  roam, 
1  languish  to  return,  and  die  at  home. 
Whate'er  the  gods  shall  destine  me  to  bear 
In  the  black  ocean,  or  the  watery  war, 
5Tis  mine  to  master  with  a  constant  mind ; 
Inur'd  to  perils,  to  the  worst  resign'd. 
By  seas,  by  wars,  so  many  dangers  run  ; 
Still  I  can  suffer :  their  high  will  be  done  !" 

Thus  while  he  spoke,  the  beamy  sun  descends, 
And  rising  night  her  friendly  shade  extends. 
To  the  close  grot  the  lonely  pair  remove, 
And  slept  delighted  with  the  gifts  of  love. 
"When  rosy  morning  call'd  them  from  their  rest, 
Ulysses  rob'd  him  in  the  cloak  and  vest. 
The  nymph's  fair  head  a  veil  transparent  grac'd  ; 
Her  swelling  loins  a  radiant  zone  embrac'd 
With  flowers  of  gold  :  an  under  robe,  unbound, 
In  snowy  waves  flow'd  glittering  on  the  ground. 
Forth  issuing  thus,  she  gave  him  first  to  wield 
A  weighty  axe,  with  truest  temper  steel'd, 
G 


98 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  5. 


And  double  edg'd ;  the  handle  smooth  and  plain, 

Wrought  of  the  clouded  olive's  easy  grain  ; 

And  next,  a  wedge  to  drive  with  sweepy  sway : 

Then  to  the  neighbouring  forest  led  the  way. 

On  the  lone  island's  utmost  verge  there  stood 

Of  poplars,  pines,  and  firs,  a  lofty  wood, 

Whose  leafless  summits  to  the  skies  aspire, 

Scorch'd  by  the  sun,  or  sear'd  by  heavenly  fire : 

(Already  dried.)    These  pointing  out  to  view, 

The  nymph  just  show'd  him,  and  with  tears  withdrew. 

.Now  toils  the  hero;  trees  on  trees  o'erthrown 
Fall  crackling  round  him,  and  the  forests  groan: 
Sudden,  full  twenty  on  the  plain  are  strow'd 
And  lopp'd,  and  lighten'd  of  their  branchy  load. 
At  equal  angles  these  dispos'd  to  join, 
He  smooth'd  and  squar'd  them,  by  the  rule  and  line. 
(The  wimbles  for  the  work  Calypso  found) 
With  those  he  pierc'd  them,  and  with  clinchers  bound. 
Long  and  capacious  as  a  shipwright  forms 
Some  bark's  broad  bottom  to  outride  the  storms, 
So  large  he  built  the  raft :  then  ribb'd  it  strong 
From  space  to  space,  and  nail'd  the  planks  along  : 
These  form'd  the  sides :  the  deck  he  fashion'd  last; 
Then  o'er  the  vessel  rais'd  the  taper  mast, 
With  crossing  sail-yards  dancing  in  the  wind ; 
And  to  the  helm  the  guiding  rudder  join'd. 
(With  yielding  osiers  fenc'd,  to  break  the  force 
Of  surging  waves,  and  steer  the  steady  course) 
Thy  loom,  Calypso !  for  the  future  sails 
Supplied  the  cloth,  capacious  of  the  gales. 
With  stays  and  cordage  last  he  rigg'd  the  ship, 
And,  roll'd  on  levers,  launch'd  her  in  the  deep. 

Four  days  were  past,  and  now,  the  work  complete, 
Shone  the  fifth  morn  :  when  from  her  sacred  seat 
The  nymph  dismiss'd  him  (odorous  garments  given,) 
And  bath'd  in  fragrant  oils  that  breath' d  of  heaven ; 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Then  fill'd  two  goat  skins  with  her  hands  divine, 
With  water  one,  and  one  with  sable  wine ; 
Of  every  kind,  provisions  heav'd  aboard  ; 
And  the  full  decks  with  copious  viands  stor'd. 
The  goddess,  last,  a  gentle  breeze  supplies, 
To  curl  old  ocean,  and  to  warm  the  skies. 

And  now  rejoicing  in  the  prosperous  gales, 
With  beating  heart  Ulysses  spreads  his  sails ; 
Plac'd  at  the  helm  he  sat,  and  marked  the  skies, 
Nor  clos'd  in  sleep  his  ever-watchful  eyes. 
There  view'd  the  Pleiads,  and  the  northern  team, 
And  great  Orion's  more  refulgent  beam, 
To  which,  around  the  axle  of  the  sky 
The  bear  revolving,  points  his  golden  eye  : 
Who  shines  exalted  on  th'  ethereal  plain, 
Nor  bathes  his  blazing  forehead  in  the  main. 
Far  on  the  left  those  radiant  fires  to  keep 
The  nymph  directed,  as  he  sail'd  the  deep. 
Full  seventeen  nights  he  cut  the  foamy  way  j 
The  distant  land  appear'd  the  following  day ; 
Then  swell'd  to  sight  Phaeacia's  dusky  coast, 
And  woody  mountains,  half  in  vapours  lost; 
That  lay  before  him,  indistinct  and  vast, 
Like  a  broad  shield  amid  the  watery  waste. 

But  him,  thus  voyaging  the  deeps  below, 
From  far,  on  Solyme's  aerial  brow, 
The  king  of  Ocean  saw,  and  seeing  burn'd : 
(From  Ethiopia's  happy  climes  return'd  :) 
The  raging  monarch  shook  his  azure  head, 
And  thus  in  secret  to  his  soul  he  said  : 

"  Heavens  !  how  uncertain  are  the  powers  on 
Is  then  revers'd  the  sentence  of  the  sky, 
In  one  man's  favour  ;  while  a  distant  guest 
I  shar'd  secure  the  Ethiopian  feast  % 
Behold  how  near  Phaeacia's  land  he  draws  I 
The  land,  affix'd  by  fate's  eternal  laws 


100 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book 


To  end  his  toils.    Is  then  our  anger  vain  ? 
No  ;  if  this  sceptre  yet  commands  the  main." 

He  spoke,  and  high  the  forky  trident  hurl'd, 
Rolls  clouds  on  clouds,  and  stirs  the  watery  world. 
At  once  the  face  of  earth  and  sea  deforms. 
Swells  all  the  winds,  and  rouses  all  the  storms. 
Down  rush'd  the  night;  east,  west,  together  roar ; 
And  south,  and  north,  roll  mountains  to  the  shore ; 
Then  shook  the  hero,  to  despair  resign'd, 
And  question'd  thus  his  yet  unconquer'd  mind : 

£<  Wretch  that  I  am  !  what  further  fates  attend 
This  life  of  toils,  and  what  my  destin'd  end  1 
Too  well,  alas  !  the  island  goddess  knew 
On  the  black  sea  what  perils  should  ensue. 
New  horrors  now  this  destin'd  head  enclose; 
Unfill'd  is  yet  the  measure  of  my  woes ; 
With  what  a  cloud  the  brows  of  heaven  are  crown'd 
What  raging  winds  !  what  roaring  waters  round  ! 
'Tis  Jove  himself  the  swelling  tempest  rears  ; 
Death,  present  death,  on  every  side  appears. 
Happy  !  thrice  happy  !  who,  in  battle  slain, 
Press'd,  in  Atrides'  cause,  the  Trojan  plain : 
Oh  !  had  I  died  before  that  well-fought  wall ; 
Had  some  distinguished  day  renown'd  my  fall ; 
(Such  as  was  that,  when  showers  of  javelins  fled 
From  conquering  Troy  around  Achilles'  dead) 
All  Greece  had  paid  me  solemn  funerals  then, 
And  spread  my  glory  with  the  sons  of  men. 
A  shameful  fate  now  hides  my  hapless  head, 
Unwept,  unnoted,  and  for  ever  dead." 

A  mighty  wave  rush'd  o'er  him  as  he  spoke, 
The  raft  it  cover'd,  and  the  mast  it  broke ; 
Swept  from  the  deck,  and  from  the  rudder  torn, 
Far  on  the  swelling  surge  the  chief  was  borne : 
While  by  the  howling  tempest  rent  in  twain 
Flew  sail  and  sail-yards  rattling  o'er  the  main. 


Book  5.  THE    ODYSSEY.  101 

Long  press' d,  he  heav'd  beneath  the  mighty  wave, 
Clogg'd  by  the  cumbrous  vest  Calypso  gave : 
At  length  emerging,  from  his  nostrils  wide 
And  gushing  mouth,  effus'd  the  briny  tide ; 
E'en  then  not  mindless  of  his  last  retreat, 
He  seiz'd  the  raft,  and  leap'd  into  his  seat, 
Strong  with  the  fear  of  death.    The  rolling  flood 
Now  here,  now  there,  impell'd  the  floating  wood. 
As  when  a  heap  of  gather'd  thorns  is  cast, 
Now  to,  now  fro,  before  th'  autumnal  blast ; 
Together  clung,  it  rolls  around  the  field  ; 
So  roll'd  the  float,  and  so  its  texture  held  ; 
And  now  the  south,  and  now  the  north  bear  sway, 
And  now  the  east  the  foamy  floods  obey, 
And  now  the  west  wind  whirls  it  o'er  the  sea. 
The  wandering  chief  with  toils  on  toils  oppress'd, 
Leucothea  saw.  and  pity  touch'd  her  breast : 
(Herself  a  mortal  once,  of  Cadmus'  strain, 
But  now  an  azure  sister  of  the  main) 
Swift  as  a  sea-mew  springing  from  the  flood, 
All  radiant  on  the  raft  the  goddess  stood  ; 
Then  thus  address'd  him:  "Thou,  whom  heaven  de- 
crees 

To  Neptune's  wrath,  stern  tyrant  of  the  seas, 
(Unequal  contest!)  not  his  rage  and  pow'r, 
Great  as  he  is,  such  virtue  shall  devour. 
What  I  suggest  thy  wisdom  will  perform  : 
Forsake  thy  float,  and  leave  it  to  the  storm; 
Strip  off  thy  garments ;  Neptune's  fury  brave 
With  naked  strength,  and  plunge  into  the  wave. 
To  reach  Phaeacia  all  thy  nerves  extend  : 
There  fate  decrees  thy  miseries  shall  end. 
This  heavenly  scarf  beneath  thy  bosom  bind, 
And  live ;  give  all  thy  terrors  to  the  wind. 
Soon  as  thy  arms  the  happy  shore  shall  gain, 
Return  the  gift,  and  cast  it  in  the  main : 


102 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  5. 


Observe  my  orders,  and  with  heed  obey, 
Cast  it  far  off,  and  turn  thy  eyes  away.'' 

With  that  her  hand  the  sacred  veil  bestows, 
Then  down  the  deeps  she  div'd,  from  whence  she  rose  ; 
A  moment  snatch'd  the  shining  form  away, 
And  all  was  cover'd  with  the  curling  sea. 

Struck  with  amaze,  yet  still  to  doubt  inclin'd, 
He  stands  suspended,  and  explores  his  mind. 
"  What  shall  I  do  1  Unhappy  me  !  who  knows 
But  other  gods  intend  me  other  woes  ? 
Whoe'er  thou  art,  I  shall  not  blindly  join 
Thy  pleaded  reason,  but  consult  with  mine  : 
For  scarce  in  ken  appears  that  distant  isle 
Thy  voice  foretells  me  shall  conclude  my  toil. 
Thus  then  I  judge  :  while  yet  the  planks  sustain 
The  wild  waves'  fury,  here  I  fix'd  remain ; 
But  when  their  texture  to  the  tempest  yields, 
I  launch  adventurous  on  the  liquid  fields, 
Join  to  the  help  of  gods  the  strength  of  man, 
And  take  this  method,  since  the  best  I  can." 

While  thus  his  thoughts  an  anxious  council  hold, 
The  raging  god  a  watery  mountain  roll'd ; 
Like  a  black  sheet  the  whelming  billows  spread, 
Burst  o'er  the  float,  and  thunder'd  on  his  head. 
Planks,  beams,  disparted  fly  :  the  scatter'd  wood 
Rolls  diverse,  and  in  fragments  strows  the  flood. 
So  the  rude  Boreas,  o'er  the  field  new-shorn, 
Tosses  and  drives  the  scatter'd  heaps  of  corn. 
And  now  a  single  beam  the  chief  bestrides; 
There,  pois'd  awhile  above  the  bounding  tides, 
His  limbs  discumbers  of  the  clinging  vest, 
And  binds  the  sacred  cincture  round  his  breast : 
Then  prone  on  ocean  in  a  moment  flung. 
Stretch' d  wide  his  eager  arms,  and  shot  the  seas  along, 
All  naked  now,  on  heaving  billows  laid, 
Stern  Neptune  ey'd  him3  and  contemptuous  said : 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


103 


"Go,  learn'd  in  woes,  and  other  woes  essay ! 
Go,  wander  helpless  on  the  watery  way : 
Thus,  thus  find  out  the  destin'd  shore,  and  then 
(If  Jove  ordains  it)  mix  with  happier  men. 
Whate'er  thy  fate,  the  ills  our  wrath  could  raise 
Shall  last  remember' d  in  thy  best  of  days." 

This  said,  his  sea-green  steeds  divide  the  foam, 
And  reach  high  iEgse  and  the  towery  dome. 
Now,  scarce  withdrawn  the  fierce  earth-shaking  pow'r, 
Jove's  daughter,  Pallas,  watch' d  the  favouring  hour, 
Back  to  their  caves  she  bade  the  winds  to  fly, 
And  hush'd  the  blustering  brethren  of  the  sky. 
The  drier  blasts  alone  of  Boreas  sway, 
And  bear  him  soft  on  broken  waves  away ; 
With  gentle  force  impelling  to  that  shore 
Where  fate  has  destin'd  he  shall  toil  no  more. 
And  now  two  nights,  and  now  two  days  were  past, 
Since  wide  he  wander'd  on  the  watery  waste ; 
Heav'd  on  the  surge  with  intermitting  breath, 
And  hourly  panting  in  the  arms  of  death : 
The  third  fair  morn  now  blaz'd  upon  the  main; 
Then  glassy  smooth  lay  all  the  liquid  plain, 
The  winds  were  hush'd,  the  billows  scarcely  curl'd, 
And  a  dead  silence  still'd  the  watery  world. 
When,  lifted  on  a  ridgy  wave,  he  spies 
The  land  at  distance,  and  with  sharpen'd  eyes. 
As  pious  children  joy  with  vast  delight 
When  a  lov'd  sire  revives  before  their  sight, 
(Who  lingering  long  has  call'd  on  death  in  vain, 
Fix'd  by  some  demon  to  the  bed  of  pain, 
Till  heaven  by  miracle  his  life  restore) 
So  joys  Ulysses  at  th'  appearing  shore ; 
And  sees  (and  labours  onward  as  he  sees) 
The  rising  forests,  and  the  tufted  trees, 
And  now,  as  near  approaching  as  the  sound 
Of  human  voice  the  listening  ear  may  wound, 


104 


THE    0  D  Y  S  SET, 


Book  5. 


Amidst  the  rocks  he  hears  a  hollow  roar 
Of  murmuring  surges  breaking  on  the  shore : 
Nor  peaceful  port  was  there,  nor  winding  bay, 
To  shield  the  vessel  from  the  rolling  sea, 
But  cliffs,  and  shaggy  shores,  a  dreadful  sight ! 
All  rough  with  rocks,  with  foamy  billows  white. 
Fear  seiz'd  his  slacken'd  limbs  and  beating  heart, 
As  thus  he  commun'd  with  his  soul  apart : 

"  Ah  me !  when  o'er  a  length  of  waters  toss'd, 
These  eyes  at  last  behold  th'  unhop'd-for  coast, 
No  port  receives  me  from  the  angry  main, 
But  the  loud  deeps  demand  me  baek  again. 
Above  sharp  rocks  forbid  access ;  around 
Roar  the  wild  waves  :  beneath  is  sea  profound ! 
No  footing  sure  affords  the  faithless  sand, 
To  stem  too  rapid,  and  too  deep  to  stand. 
If  here  I  enter,  my  efforts  are  vain, 
Dash'd  on  the  cliffs,  or  heav'd  into  the  main ; 
Or  round  the  island  if  my  course  I  bend, 
"Where  the  ports  open,  or  the  shores  descend, 
Back  to  the  seas  the  rolling  surge  may  sweep, 
And  bury  all  my  hopes  beneath  the  deep : 
Or  some  enormous  whale  the  god  may  send 
(For  many  such  on  Amphitrite  attend :) 
Too  well  the  turns  of  mortal  chance  I  know, 
And  hate  relentless  of  my  heavenly  foe." 

While  thus  he  thought,  a  monstrous  wave  upbore 
The  chief,  and  dash'd  him  on  the  craggy  shore : 
Torn  was  his  skin,  nor  had  the  ribs  been  whole, 
But  instant  Pallas  enter'd  in  his  soul. 
Close  to  the  cliff  with  both  his  hands  he  clung, 
And  stuck  adherent,  and  suspended  hung  ; 
Till  the  huge  surge  roll'd  off;  then,  backward  sweep 
The  refluent  tides,  and  plunge  him  in  the  deep. 
As  when  the  polypus,  from  forth  his  cave 
Torn  with  full  force,  reluctant  beats  the  wave ; 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


105 


His  ragged  claws  are  stuck  with  stones  and  sands : 
So  the  rough  rock  had  shagg'd  Ulysses'  hands. 
And  now  had  perish'd,  whelm'd  beneath  the  main, 
Th'  unhappy  man ;  e'en  fate  had  been  in  vain : 
But  all  subduing  Pallas  lent  her  pow'r, 
And  prudence  sav'd  him  in  the  needful  hour. 
Beyond  the  beating  surge  his  course  he  bore, 
(A  wider  circle,  but  in  sight  of  shore) 
With  longing  eyes,  observing,  to  survey 
Some  smooth  ascent,  or  safe-sequester' d  bay. 
Between  the  parting  rocks  at  length  he  spied 
A  falling  stream  with  gentler  waters  glide  ; 
Where  to  the  seas  the  shelving  shore  declin'd, 
And  form'd  a  bay,  impervious  to  the  wind. 
To  this  calm  port  the  glad  Ulysses  press'd, 
And  hail'd  the  river,  and  its  god  address'd : 

11  Whoe'er  thou  art,  before  whose  streams  unknown 
I  bend,  a  suppliant  at  thy  watery  throne, 
Hear,  azure  king  !  nor  let  me  fly  in  vain 
To  thee  from  Neptune  and  the  raging  main. 
Heaven  hears  and  pities  hapless  men  like  me, 
For  sacred  e'en  to  gods  is  misery : 
Let  then  thy  waters  give  the  weary  rest, 
And  save  a  suppliant,  and  a  man  distress'd." 

He  pray'd,  and  straight  the  gentle  stream  subsides, 
Detains  the  rushing  current  of  his  tides, 
Before  the  wanderer  smooths  the  wat'ry  way, 
And  soft  receives  him  from  the  rolling  sea. 
That  moment,  fainting  as  he  touch'd  the  shore, 
He  dropp'd  his  sinewy  arms  :  his  knees  no  more 
Perform' d  their  office ;  or  his  weight  upheld : 
His  swol'n  heart  heav'd  ;  his  bloated  body  swell'd : 
From  mouth  and  nose  the  briny  torrent  ran; 
And  lost  in  lassitude  lay  all  the  man, 
Depriv'd  of  voice,  of  motion,  and  of  breath; 
The  soul  scarce  waking,  in  the  arms  of  death. 


106  THE    ODYSSEY.  Book  5. 

Soon  as  warm  life  its  wonted  office  found, 
The  mindful  chief  Leucothea's  scarf  unbound  ; 
Observant  of  her  word,  he  turn'd  aside 
His  head,  and  cast  it  on  the  rolling  tide. 
Behind  him  far,  upon  the  purple  waves 
The  waters  waft  it,  and  the  nymph  receives. 

Now  parting  from  the  stream,  Ulysses  found 
A  mossy  bank  with  pliant  rushes  crown'd  ; 
The  bank  he  press'd,  and  gently  kiss'd  the  ground ; 
Where  on  the  flowery  herb  as  soft  he  lay, 
Thus  to  his  soul  the  sage  began  to  say  : 

"  What  will  ye  next  ordain,  ye  powers  on  high ! 
And  yet,  ah  yet,  what  fates  are  we  to  try ! 
Here  by  the  stream,  if  I  the  night  outwear, ) 
Thus  spent  already,  how  shall  nature  bear  > 
The  dews  descending  and  nocturnal  air  ;  ) 
Or  chilly  vapours,  breathing  from  the  flood 

"When  morning  rises  ?  If  I  take  the  wood, 

And  in  thick  shelter  of  innumerous  boughs 
Enjoy  the  comfort  gentle  sleep  allows  ; 
Though  fenc'd  from  cold,  and  though  my  toil  be  pass'd, 
"What  savage  beast  may  wander  in  the  waste  ? 
Perhaps  I  yet  may  fall  a  bloody  prey 
To  prowling  bears  or  lions  in  the  way." 

Thus  long  debating  in  himself  he  stood  : 
At  length  he  took  the  passage  to  the  wood, 
Whose  shady  horrors  on  a  rising  brow 
Wav'd  high,  and  frown'd  upon  the  stream  below. 
There  grew  two  olives,  closest  of  the  grove, 
With  roots  entwin'd,  and  branches  interwove ; 
Alike  their  leaves,  but  not  alike  they  smil'd 
With  sister-fruits;  one  fertile,  one  was  wild. 
Nor  here  the  sun's  meridian  rays  had  power, 
Nor  wind  sharp  piercing,  nor  the  rushing  shower ; 
The  verdant  arch  so  close  its  texture  kept : 
Beneath  this  covert  great  Ulysses  crept. 


Book  5. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


107 


Of  gather'd  leaves  an  ample  bed  he  made, 

(Thick  strown  by  tempest  through  the  bowery  shade) 

Where  three  at  least  might  winter's  cold  defy, 

Though  Boreas  rag'd  along  th'  inclement  sky. 

This  store,  with  joy  the  patient  hero  found, 

And,  sunk  amidst  them,  heap'd  the  leaves  around. 

As  some  poor  peasant,  fated  to  reside 

Remote  from  neighbours  in  a  forest  wide, 

Studious  to  save  what  human  wants  require, 

In  embers  heap'd,  preserves  the  seeds  of  fire  : 

Hid  in  dry  foliage  thus  Ulysses  lies, 

Till  Pallas  pour'd  soft  slumbers  on  his  eyes; 

And  golden  dreams  (the  gift  of  sweet  repose) 

Lull'd  all  his  cares,  and  banish'd  all  his  woes. 


BOOK  VI. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

PALLAS  appearing  in  a  dream  to  Nausicaa  (the  daughter  of  Al- 
cinous  king  of  Phwacia)  commands  her  to  descend  to  the  river, 
and  wash  the  robes  of  state,  in  preparation  to  her  nuptials.  Nau- 
sicaa goes  with  her  handmaids  to  the  river ;  where,  while 
the  garments  are  spread  on  the  bank,  they  divert  themselves  in 
sports.  Their  voices  awake  Ulysses,  who,  addressing  himself 
to  the  princess,  is  by  her  relieved  and  clothed,  and  receives  di- 
rections in  what  manner  to  apply  to  the  king  and  queen  of  the 
island. 


While  thus  the  weary  wanderer  sunk  to  rest, 

And  peaceful  slumbers  calm'd  his  anxious  breast, 

The  martial  maid  from  heaven's  aerial  height 

Swift  to  Phaeacia  winged  her  rapid  flight. 

In  elder  times  the  soft  Pha^acian  train 

In  ease  possess'd  the  wide  Hyperian  plain  ; 

Till  the  Cyclopean  race  in  arms  arose, 

A  lawless  nation  of  gigantic  foes  ; 

Then  great  Nausithous  from  Hyperia  far, 

Through  seas  retreating  from  the  sound  of  war, 

The  recreant  nation  to  fair  Scheria  led, 

Where  never  science  rear'd  her  laurel'd  head : 

There,  round  his  tribes  a  strength  of  wall  he  rais'd ; 

To  heaven  the  glittering  domes  and  temples  blaz'd  ; 


110 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  6. 


Just  to  his  realms,  he  parted  grounds  from  grounds, 
And  shar'd  the  lands,  and  gave  the  lands  their  bounds. 
Now  in  the  silent  grave  the  monarch  lay, 
And  wise  Alcinous  held  the  regal  sway. 

To  his  high  palace  through  the  fields  of  air 
The  goddess  shot :  Ulysses  was  her  care. 
There  as  the  night  in  silence  roll'd  away, 
A  heaven  of  charms  divine  Nausicaa  lay : 
Through  the  thick  gloom  the  shining  portals  blaze : 
Two  nymphs  the  portals  guard,  each  nymph  a  grace. 
Light  as  the  viewless  air,  the  warrior-maid 
Glides  through  the  valves,  and  hovers  round  her  head; 
A  favourite  virgin's  blooming  form  she  took, 
From  Dymas  sprung,  and  thus  the  vision  spoke : 

M  Oh  indolent !  to  waste  thy  hours  away  ! 
And  sleep' st  thou  careless  of  the  bridal  day  7 
Thy  spousal  ornaments  neglected  lies  ; 
Arise,  prepare  the  bridal  train,  arise ! 
A  just  applause  the  cares  of  dress  impart, 
And  give  soft  transport  to  a  parent's  heart. 
Haste,  to  the  limpid  stream  direct  thy  way, 
When  the  gay  morn  unveils  her  smiling  ray: 
Haste  to  the  stream !  companion  of  thy  care, 
Lo,  1  thy  steps  attend,  thy  labours  share. 
Virgin,  awake  !  thy  marriage  hour  is  nigh, 
See  !  from  their  thrones  thy  kindred  monarchs  sigh. 
The  royal  car  at  early  dawn  obtain, 
And  order  mules  obedient  to  the  rein  ; 
For  rough  the  way,  and  distant  rolls  the  wave, 
Where  their  fair  vests  Phseacian  virgins  lave. 
In  pomp  ride  forth  :  for  pomp  becomes  the  great, 
And  majesty  derives  a  grace  from  state." 

Then  to  the  palaces  of  heaven  she  sails, 
Incumbent  on  the  wings  of  wafting  gales: 
The  seat  of  gods !  the  regions  mild  of  peace, 
Full  joy,  and  calm  eternity  of  ease. 


Book  6. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Ill 


There  no  rude  winds  presume  to  shake  the  skies, 
No  rains  descend,  no  snowy  vapours  rise ; 
But  on  immortal  thrones  the  bless'd  repose ! 
The  firmanent  with  living  splendour  glows. 
Hither  the  goddess  wing'd  th'  aerial  way, 
Through  heaven's  eternal  gates  that  blaz'd  with  day. 

Now  from  her  rosy  car  Aurora  shed 
The  dawn,  and  all  the  orient  flam'd  with  red. 
Uprose  the  virgin  with  the  morning  light, 
Obedient  to  the  vision  of  the  night. 
The  queen  she  sought:  the  queen  her  hours  bestow'd 
In  curious  works ;  the  whirling  spindle  glow'd 
With  crimson  threads,  while  busy  damsels  cull 
The  snowy  fleece,  to  twist  the  purple  wool. 
Meanwhile  Phaeacia's  peers  in  council  sat : 
From  his  high  dome  the  king  descends  in  state, 
Then  with  a  filial  awe  the  royal  maid 
Approach'd  him  passing,  and  submissive  said: 

"  Will  my  dread  sire  his  ear  regardful  deign, 
And  may  his  child  the  royal  car  obtain  1 
Say,  with  thy  garments  shall  I  bend  my  way 
Where  through  the  vales  the  mazy  waters  stray  1 
A  dignity  of  dress  adorns  the  great, 
And  kings  draw  lustre  from  the  robe  of  state. 
Five  sons  thou  hast :  three  wait  the  bridal  day, 
And  spotless  robes  become  the  young  and  gay  : 
So  when  with  praise  amid  the  dance  they  shine, 
By  these  my  cares  adorn'd,  that  praise  is  mine." 

Thus  she:  but  blushes^  ill-restrained,  betray 
Her  thoughts  intentive  on  the  bridal  day. 
The  conscious  sire  the  dawning  blush  survey'd, 
And  smiling  thus  bespoke  the  blooming  maid  : 
"  My  child,  my  darling  joy,  the  car  receive ; 
That,  and  whate'er  our  daughter  asks,  we  give." 

Swift  at  the  royal  nod  th'  attending  train 
The  car  prepare,  the  mules  incessant  rein. 


112 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  6. 


The  blooming  virgin  with  despatchful  cares 
Tunics,  and  stoles,  and  robes  imperial  bears. 
The  queen,  assiduous,  to  her  train  assigns 
The  sumptuous  viands,  and  the  flavorous  wines. 
The  train  prepare  a  cruise  of  curious  mould, 
A  cruise  of  fragrance,  form'd  of  burnish'd  gold  ; 
Odour  divine  !  whose  soft  refreshing  streams 
Sleek  the  smooth  skin,  and  scent  the  snowy  limbs. 

Now  mounting  the  gay  seat,  the  silken  reins 
Shine  in  her  hand  :  along  the  sounding  plains 
Swift  fly  the  mules  :  nor  rode  the  nymph  alone; 
Around,  a  bevy  of  bright  damsels  shone. 
They  seek  the  cisterns  where  Phseacian  dames 
Wash  their  fair  garments  in  the  limpid  streams  ; 
Where,  gathering  into  depth  from  falling  rills, 
The  lucid  wave  a  spacious  basin  fills. 
The  mules  unharness'd  range  beside  the  main, 
Or  crop  the  verdant  herbage  of  the  plain. 

Then  emulous  the  royal  robes  they  lave, 
And  plunge  the  vestures  in  the  cleansing  wave: 
(The  vestures  cleans'd  o'erspread  the  shelly  sand, 
Their  snowy  lustre  whitens  all  the  strand) 
Then  with  a  short  repast  relieve  their  toil, 
And  o'er  their  limbs  diffuse  ambrosial  oil ; 
And  while  the  robes  imbibe  the  solar  ray, 
O'er  the  green  mead  the  sporting  virgins  play 
(Their  shining  veils  unbound.)    Along  the  skies 
Toss'd,  and  retoss'd,  the  ball  incessant  flies. 
They  sport,  they  feast ;  Nausicaa  lifts  her  voice, 
And  warbling  sweet,  makes  earth  and  heaven  rejoice. 

As  when  o'er  Erymanth  Diana  roves, 
Or  wide  Taygetus'  resounding  groves; 
A  sylvan  train  the  huntress-queen  surrounds, 
Her  rattling  quiver  from  her  shoulder  sounds ; 
Fierce  in  the  sport,  along  the  mountain's  brow 
They  bay  the  boar,  or  chase  the  bounding  roe : 


Book  G. 


THE    OD  YSSE Y. 


113 


High  o'er  the  lawn,  with  more  majestic  pace. 
Above  the  nymphs  she  treads  with  stately  grace  : 
Distinguished  excellence  the  goddess  proves; 
Exults  Latona,  as  the  virgin  moves. 
With  equal  grace  Nausicaa  trod  the  plain, 
And  shone  transcendant  o'er  the  beauteous  train. 

Meantime  (the  care  and  favourite  of  the  skies) 
Wrapt  in  embowering  shade,  Ulysses  lies, 
His  woes  forgot !  but  Pallas  now  address' d 
To  break  the  bands  of  all-composing  rest. 
Forth  from  her  snowy  hand  Nausicaa  threw 
The  various  ball ;  the  ball  erroneous  flew, 
And  swam  the  stream  :  loud  shrieks  the  virgin-train, 
And  the  loud  shriek  redoubles  from  the  main. 
Wak'd  by  the  shrilling  sound,  Ulysses  rose, 
And  to  the  deaf  woods,  wailing,  breath'd  his  woes  : 

"  Ah  me  !  on  what  inhospitable  coast, 
On  what  new  region  is  Ulysses  tost : 
Possess'd  by  wild  barbarians  fierce  in  arms  ; 
Or  men  whose  bosom  tender  pity  warms  1 
What  sounds  are  these  that  gather  from  the  shores : 
The  voice  of  nymphs  that  haunt  the  sylvan  bow'rs, 
The  fair-hair'd  Dryads  of  the  shady  wood, 
Or  azure  daughters  of  the  silver  flood ; 
Or  human  voice  1  but,  issuing  from  the  shades, 
Why  cease  I  straight  to  learn  what  sound  invades?" 

Then,  where  the  grove  with  leaves  umbrageous 
bends, 

With  forceful  strength  a  branch  the  hero  rends ; 
Around  his  loins  the  verdant  cincture  spreads 
A  wreathy  foliage  and  concealing  shades. 
As  when  a  lion  in  the  midnight  hours, 
Beat  by  rude  blasts,  and  wet  with  wintry  show'rs, 
Descends  terrific  from  the  mountain's  brow: 
With  living  flames  his  rolling  eye-balls  glow; 
With  concious  strength  elate,  he  bends  his  way 
H 


114 


THE  ODVSSEy, 


Book  6. 


Majestically  fierce,  to  seize  his  prey, 
(The  steer  or  stag ;)  or  with  keen  hunger  bold 
Springs  o'er  the  ience,  and  dissipates  the  fold. 
No  less  a  terror,  from  the  neighbouring  groves 
(Rough  from  the  tossing  surge)  Ulysses  moves  ; 
Urg'd  on  by  want,  and  recent  from  the  storms  j 
The  brackish  ooze  his  manly  grace  deforms. 
Wide  o'er  the  shore  with  many  a  piercing  cry 
To  rocks,  to  caves,  the  frighted  virgins  fly ; 
All  but  the  nymph  :  the  nymph  stood  fix'd  alone, 
By  Pallas  arm'd  with  boldness  not  her  own. 
Meantime  in  dubious  thought  the  king  awaits, 
And  selfLconsidering,  as  he  stands,  debates  ; 
Distant  his  mournful  story  to  declare, 
Or  prostrate  at  her  knees  address  the  pray'r. 
But  fearful  to  offend,  by  wisdom  swav'd," 
At  awful  distance  he  accosts  the  maid : 

"  If  from  the  skies  a  goddess,  or  if  earth 
(Imperial  virgin)  boast  thy  glorious  birth, 
To  thee  I  bend !  if  in  that  bright  disguise 
Thou  visit  earth,  a  daughter  of  the  skies, 
Hail,  Dian,  hail !  the  huntress  of  the  groves 
So  shines  majestic,  and  so  stately  moves, 
So  breathes  an  air  divine !  But  if  thy  race 
Be  mortal,  and  this  earth  thy  native  place, 
Bless'd  is  the  father  from  whose  loins  you  sprung, 
Bless'd  is  the  mother  at  whose  breast  you  hung, 
Bless'd  are  the  brethren  who  thy  blood  divide, 
To  such  a  miracle  of  charms  allied  : 
Joyful  they  see  applauding  princes  gaze, 
When  stately  in  the  dance  you  swim  th'  harmonious 
maze. 

But  bless'd  o'er  all,  the  youth  with  heavenly  charms, 
Who  clasps  the  bright  perfection  in  his  arms  ! 
Never,  I  never  view'd  till  this  bless'd  hour 
Such  finish'd  grace  !  I  gaze  and  I  adore  ! 


Book  6. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


115 


Thus  seems  the  palm  with  stately  honours  crown'd 
By  Phoebus'  altars  ;  thus  o'erlooks  the  ground  ; 
The  pride  of  Delos.    (By  the  Delian  coast 
I  voyag'd,  leader  of  a  warrior-host, 
But  ah  how  chang'd !  from  thence  my  sorrow  flows ; 
O  fatal  voyage,  source  of  all  my  woes  !) 
Raptur'd  I  stood,  and  as  this  hour  amaz'd, 
With  reverence  at  the  lofty  wonder  gaz'd : 
Raptur'd  I  stand!  for  earth  ne'er  knew  to  bear 
A  plant  so  stately,  or  a  nymph  so  fair. 
Aw'd  from  access,  I  lift  my  suppliant  hands ; 
For  misery,  O  queen,  before  thee  stands ! 
Twice  ten  tempestuous  nights  1  roll'd,  resign'd 
To  roaring  billows,  and  the  warring  wind  ; 
Heaven  bade  the  deep  to  spare  !  but  heaven,  my  foe, 
Spares  only  to  inflict  some  mightier  wo  ! 
Innur'd  to  cares,  to  death  in  all  its  forms  ; 
Oatcast  I  rove,  familiar  with  the  storms! 
Once  more  I  view  the  face  of  humankind  : 
O  let  soft  pity  touch  thy  generous  mind  ! 
Unconcious  of  what  air  I  breathe,  I  stand 
Naked,  defenceless,  on  a  foreign  land. 
Propitious  to  my  wants,  a  vest  supply 
To  guard  the  wretched  from  th'  inclement  sky : 
So  may  the  gods  who  heaven  and  earth  control, 
Crown  the  chaste  wishes  of  thy  virtuous  soul, 
On  thy  soft  hours  their  choicest  blessings  shed  ; 
Bless'd  with  a  husband  be  thy  bridal  bed ; 
Bless'd  be  thy  husband  with  a  blooming  race, 
And  lasting  union  crown  your  blissful  days. 
The  gods,  when  they  supremely  bless,  bestow 
Firm  union  on  their  favourites  below  : 
Then  envy  grieves,  with  inly  pining  hate ; 
The  good  exult,  and  heaven  is  in  our  state." 

To  whom  the  nymph :  "  O  stranger,  cease  thy  care* 
Wise  is  thy  soul,  but  man  is  born  to  bear : 


116 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  6. 


Jove  weighs  affairs  of  earth  in  dubious  scales, 

And  the  good  suffers,  while  the  bad  prevails : 

Bear,  with  a  soul  resign'd,  the  will  of  Jove ; 

Who  breathes,  must  mourn  :  thy  woes  are  from  above. 

But  since  thou  tread'st  our  hospitable  shore, 

'Tis  mine  to  bid  the  wretched  grieve  no  more, 

To  clothe  the  naked,  and  thy  way  to  guide — 

Know,  the  Phaaacian  tribes  this  land  divide ; 

From  great  Alcinous'  royal  loins  I  spring, 

A  happy  nation  and  a  happy  king." 

Then  to  her  maids — "  Why,  why,  ye  coward  train, 

These  fears,  this  flight  1  ye  fear,  and  fly  in  vain. 

Dread  ye  a  foe  1  dismiss  that  idle  dread, 

'Tis  death  with  hostile  step  these  shores  to  tread  : 

Safe  in  the  love  of  heaven,  an  ocean  flows 

Around  our  realm,  a  barrier  from  the  foes ; 

'Tis  ours  this  son  of  sorrow  to  relieve, 

Cheer  the  sad  heart,  nor  let  affliction  grieve. 

By  Jove  the  stranger  and  the  poor  are  sent, 

And  what  to  those  we  give,  to  Jove  is  lent. 

Then  food  supply,  and  bathe  his  fainting  limbs 

Where  waving  shades  obscure  the  mazy  streams." 

Obedient  to  the  call,  the  chief  they  guide 
To  the  calm  current  of  the  secret  tide ; 
Close  by  the  stream  a  royal  dress  they  lay, 
A  vest  and  robe,  with  rich  embroidery  gay : 
Then  unguents  in  a  vase  of  gold  supply, 
That  breath'd  a  fragrance  through  the  balmy  sky. 

To  them  the  king :  "  No  longer  I  detain 
Your  friendly  care ;  retire,  ye  virgin  train ! 
Retire,  while  from  my  wearied  limbs  I  lave 
The  foul  pollution  of  the  briny  wave  : 
Ye  gods !  since  this  worn  frame  refection  knew, 
What  scenes  have  I  survey'd  of  dreadful  view  7 
But,  nymphs,  recede  !  sage  chastity  denies 
To  raise  the  blush,  or  pain  the  modest  eyes." 


Book  6. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


117 


The  nymphs  withdrawn,  at  once  into  the  tide 
Active  he  bounds  ;  the  flashing  waves  divide  : 
O'er  all  his  limbs  his  hands  the  wave  diffuse, 
And  from  his  locks  compress  the  weedy  ooze ; 
The  balmy  oil,  a  fragrant  shower  he  sheds: 
Then,  dress'd  in  pomp  magnificently  treads. 
The  warrior-goddess  gives  his  frame  to  shine 
With  majesty  enlarg'd,  and  air  divine  : 
Back  from  his  brows  a  length  of  hair  unfurls, 
His  hyacinthine  locks  descend  in  wavy  curls. 
As  by  some  artist  to  whom  Vulcan  gives 
His  skill  divine,  a  breathing  statue  lives  ; 
By  Pallas  taught,  he  frames  the  wondrous  mould, 
And  o'er  the  silver  pours  the  fusile  gold  : 
So  Pallas  his  heroic  frame  improves 
With  heavenly  bloom,  and  like  a  god  he  moves. 
A  fragrance  breathes  around :  majestic  grace 
Attend  his  steps :  th'  astonish'd  virgins  gaze. 
Soft  he  reclines  along  the  murmuring  seas, 
Inhaling  freshness  from  the  fanning  breeze. 

The  wondering  nymph  his  glorious  port  survey'd, 
And  to  her  damsels,  with  amazement,  said  : 

"Not  without  care  divine  the  stranger  treads 
This  land  of  joy  :  his  steps  some  godhead  leads : 
Would  Jove  destroy  him,  sure  he  had  been  driven 
Far  from  this  realm,  the  favourite  isle  of  heaven. 
Late  a  sad  spectacle  of  wo  he  trod 
The  desert  sands,  and  now  he  looks  a  god. 
O  heaven  !  in  my  connubial  hour  decree 
This  man  my  spouse,  or  such  a  spouse  as  he  ! 
But  haste,  the  viands  and  the  bowl  provide" — 
The  maids  the  viands  and  the  bowl  supplied : 
Eager  he  fed,  for  keen  his  hunger  rag'd 
And  with  the  generous  vintage  thirst  assuag'd. 

Now  on  return  her  care  Nausicaa  bends, 
The  robe  resumes,  the  glittering  car  ascends, 


118 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  6. 


Far-blooming  o'er  the  field:  and  as  she  press'd 
The  splendid  seat,  the  listening  chief  address'd : 

"  Stranger,  arise  !  the  sun  rolls  down  the  day, 
Lo,  to  the  palace  I  direct  thy  way : 
Where  in  high  state  the  nobles  of  the  land 
Attend  my  royal  sire,  a  radiant  band. 
Eut  hear,  though  wisdom  in  thy  soul  presides, 
Speaks  from  thy  tongue,  and  every  action  guides : 
Advance  at  distance  while  I  pass  the  plain 
"Where  o'er  the  furrows  waves  the  golden  grain  : 
Alone  I  reascend — With  airy  mounds 
A  strength  of  wall  the  guarded  city  bounds : 
The  jutting  land  two  ample  bays  divides  ; 
Full  through  the  narrow  mouths  descend  the  tides  : 
The  spacious  basins  arching  rocks  enclose, 
A  sure  defence  from  every  storm  that  blows. 
Close  to  the  bay  great  Neptune's  fane  adjoins; 
And  near,  a  forum  flank'd  with  marble  shines, 
Where  the  bold  youth,  the  numerous  fleets  to  store. 
Shape  the  broad  sail,  or  smooth  the  taper  oar  : 
For  not  the  bow  they  bend,  nor  boast  the  skill 
To  give  the  feather'd  arrow  wings  to  kill ; 
But  the  tall  mast  above  the  vessel  rear, 
Or  teach  the  fluttering  sail  to  float  in  air. 
They  rush  into  the  deep  with  eager  joy, 
Climb  the  steep  surge,  and  through  the  tempest  fly ; 
A  proud,  unpolish'd  race — To  me  belongs 
The  care  to  shun  the  blast  of  slanderous  tongues  : 
Lest  malice,  prone  the  virtuous  to  defame, 
Thus  with  vile  censure  taint  my  spotless  name  : 

'  What  stranger  this,  whom  thus  Nausicaa  leads  1 
Heavens  !  with  what  graceful  majesty  he  treads  ! 
Perhaps  a  native  of  some  distant  shore, 
The  future  consort  of  her  bridal  hour ; 
Or,  rather,  some  descendant  of  the  skies ; 
Won  by  her  prayer,  th'  aerial  bridegroom  flies. 


Book  6. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


119 


Heaven  on  that  hour  its  choicest  influence  shed, 
That  gave  a  foreign  spouse  to  crown  her  bed  ! 
All,  all  the  godlike  worthies  that  adorn 
This  realm,  she  flies ;  Phaeacia  is  her  scorn/ 

"  And  just  the  blame ;  for  female  innocence 
Not  only  flies  the  guilt,  but  shuns  th'  offence : 
Th'  unguarded  virgin,  as  unchaste,  I  blame  ; 
And  the  least  freedom  with  the  sex  is  shame, 
Till  our  consenting  sires  a  spouse  provide, 
And  public  nuptials  justify  the  bride. 

<£  But  would'st  thou  soon  review  thy  native  plain  1 
Attend,  and  speedy  thou  shalt  pass  the  main : 
Nigh  where  a  grove,  with  verdant  poplars  crown'd, 
To  Pallas  sacred,  shades  the  holy  ground, 
We  bend  our  way  :  a  bubbling  fount  distills 
A  lucid  lake,  and  thence  descends  in  rills ; 
Around  the  grove  a  mead  with  lively  green 
Falls  by  degrees,  and  forms  a  beauteous  scene ; 
Here  a  rich  juice  the  royal  vineyard  pours; 
And  there  the  garden  yields  a  waste  of  flowers. 
Hence  lies  the  town,  as  far  as  to  the  ear 
Floats  a  strong  shout  along  the  waves  of  air. 
There  wait  embower'd,  while  I  ascend  alone 
To  great  Alcinous  on  his  royal  throne. 
Arriv'd,  advance  impatient  of  delay, 
And  to  the  lofty  palace  bend  thy  way  : 
The  lofty  palace  overlooks  the  town, 
From  every  dome  by  pomp  superior  known  ; 
A  child  may  point  the  way.    With  earnest  gait 
Seek  thou  the  queen  along  the  rooms  of  state ; 
Her  royal  hand  a  wondrous  work  designs ; 
Around  a  circle  of  bright  damsels  shines, 
Part  twist  the  threads,  and  part  the  wool  dispose, 
While  with  the  purple  orb  the  spindle  glows. 
High  on  a  throne,  amid  the  Scherian  pow'rs, 
My  royal  father  shares  the  genial  hours ; 


120 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  6. 


But  to  the  queen  thy  mournful  tale  disclose, 
With  the  prevailing  eloquence  of  woes  : 
So  shalt  thou  view  with  joy  thy  natal  shore. 
Though  mountains  rise  between,  and  oceans  roar." 

She  added  not,  but  waving  as  she  wheel'd 
The  silver  scourge,  it  glitter'd  o'er  the  field  : 
With  skill  the  virgin  guides  th'  embroider'd  rein, 
Slow  rolls  the  car  before  th5  attending  train. 
Now  whirling  down  the  heavens,  the  golden  day 
Shot  through  the  western  clouds  a  dewy  ray  ; 
The  grove  they  reach,  where  from  the  sacred  shade 
To  Pallas  thus  the  pensive  hero  pray'd  : 

"  Daughter  of  Jove  !  whose  arms  in  thunder  wield 
Th'  avenging  bolt,  and  shake  the  dreadful  shield  ; 
Forsook  by  thee,  in  vain  I  sought  thy  aid 
When  blooming  billows  clos'd  above  my  head  : 
Attend,  unconquer'd  maid;  accord  my  vows, 
Bid  the  great  hear,  and  pitying  heal  my  woes." 

This  heard  Minerva,  but  forbore  to  fly 
(By  Neptune  aw'd)  apparent  from  the  sky ; 
Stern  god  !  who  rag'd  with  vengeance  unrestraint 
Till  great  Ulysses  hail'd  his  native  land. 


BOOK  VII. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE  COURT  OP  ALCINOUS. 

THE  princess  Nausicaa  returns  to  the  city,  and  Ulysses  soon  after 
follows  thither.  He  is  met  by  Pallas  in  the  form  of  a  young 
virgin,  who  guides  him  to  the  palace,  and  directs  him  in  what 
manner  to  address  the  queen  Arete.  She  then  involves  him  in  a 
mist,  which  causes  him  to  pass  invisible.  The  palace  and  gar- 
dens of  Alcinous  described.  Ulysses  falling  at  the  feet  of  the 
queen,  the  mist  disperses,  the  Phseacians  admire,  and  receive  him 
with  respect.  The  queen  inquiring  by  what  means  he  had  the 
garments  he  then  wore,  he  relates  to  her  and  Alcinous  his  de- 
parture from  Calypso,  and  his  arrival  on  their  dominions. 

The  same  day  continues,  and  the  book  ends  with  the  night. 

The  patient  heavenly  man  thus  suppliant  pray'd  ; 

While  the  slow  mules  draw  on  th*  imperial  maid ; 

Through  the  proud  streets  she  moves,  the  public  gaze  : 

The  turning  wheel  before  the  palace  stays. 

"With  ready  love  her  brothers,  gathering  round, 

Receiv'd  the  vestures,  and  the  mules  unbound. 

She  seeks  the  bridal  bower :  a  matron  there 

The  rising  lire  supplies  with  busy  care, 

Whose  charms  in  youth  her  father's  heart  infiam'dj 

Now  worn  with  age,  Eurymedusa  nam'd : 


122 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  7. 


The  captive  dame  Pha^acian  rovers  bore, 
Snatch'd  from  Epirus,  her  sweet  native  shore, 
(A  grateful  prize)  and  in  her  bloom  bestow'd 
On  good  Alcinous,  honour'd  as  a  god  : 
Nurse  of  Nausicaa  from  her  infant  years, 
And  tender  second  to  a  mother's  cares. 

Now  from  the  sacred  thicket  where  he  lay, 
To  town  Ulysses  took  the  winding  way. 
Propitious  Pallas,  to  secure  her  care, 
Around  him  spread  a  veil  of  thicken'd  air ; 
To  shun  th'  encounter  of  the  vulgar  crowd, 
Insulting  still,  inquisitive  and  loud. 
When  near  the  fam'd  Phsacian  walls  he  drew, 
The  beauteous  city  opening  to  his  view, 
His  step  a  virgin  met,  and  stood  before  : 
A  polish'd  urn  the  seeming  virgin  bore, 
And  youthful  smil'd  ;  but  in  the  low  disguise 
Lay  hid  the  goddess  with  the  azure  eyes. 

"Show  me,  fair  daughter  (thus  the  chief  demands,) 
The  house  of  him  who  rules  these  happy  lands. 
Through  many  woes  and  wanderings,  lo  !  I  come 
To  good  Alcinous'  hospitable  dome. 
Par  from  my  native  coast,  I  rove  alone, 
A  wretched  stranger,  and  of  all  unknown !" 

The  goddess  answer'd :  "  Father,  I  obey, 
And  point  the  wandering  traveller  his  way  : 
Well  known  to  me  the  palace  you  inquire, 
For  fast  beside  it  dwells  my  honour'd  sire ; 
But  silent  march,  nor  greet  the  common  train 
With  question  needless,  or  inquiry  vain. 
A  race  of  rugged  mariners  are  these ; 
Unpolish'd  men,  and  boisterous  as  their  seas : 
The  native  islanders  alone  their  care, 
And  hateful  he  that  breathes  a  foreign  air. 
These  did  the  ruler  of  the  deep  ordain 
To  build  proud  navies,  and  command  the  main ; 


Book  7. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


On  canvass  wings  to  cut  the  watery  way ; 
No  bird  so  light,  no  thought  so  swift  as  they." 

Thus  having  spoke,  th'  unknown  celestial  leads  : 
The  footsteps  of  the  deity  he  treads, 
And  secret  moves  along  the  crowded  space, 
Unseen  of  all  the  rude  Phajacian  race. 
(So  Pallas  order'd,  Pallas  to  their  eyes 
The  mist  objected,  and  condens'd  the  skies) 
The  chief  with  wonder  sees  the  extended  streets, 
The  spreading  harbours,  and  the  riding  fleets ; 
He  next  their  princes'  lofty  domes  admires, 
In  separate  islands  crown'd  with  rising  spires  ; 
And  deep  intrenchments,  and  high  walls  of  stone, 
That  gird  the  city  like  a  marble  zone. 
At  length  the  kingly  palace  gates  he  view'd  : 
There  stopp'd  the  goddess,  and  her  speech  renew'd 

"  My  task  is  done  :  the  mansion  you  inquire 
Appears  before  you ;  enter,  and  admire. 
High-thron'd,  and  feasting,  there  thou  shalt  behold 
The  sceptered  rulers.    Fear  not,  but  be  bold  : 
A  decent  boldness  ever  meets  with  friends, 
Succeeds,  and  e'en  a  stranger  recommends. 
First  to  the  queen  prefer  a  suppliant's  claim,  } 
Alcinous'  queen,  Arete  is  her  name,  > 
The  same  her  parents,  and  her  power  the  same.  ) 
For  know,  from  Ocean's  god  Nausithous  sprung, 
And  Periba^a,  beautiful  and  young  ; 
(Eurymedon's  last  hope,  who  rul'd  of  old 
The  race  of  giants,  impious,  proud,  and  bold ; 
Perish'd  the  nation  in  unrighteous  war, 
Perish'd  the  prince,  and  left  this  only  heir) 
Who  now  by  Neptune's  amorous  power  compress'd 
Produc'd  a  monarch  that  his  people  bless'd, 
Father  and  prince  of  the  Phaeacian  name ; 
From  him  Rhexenor  and  Alcinous  came. 


124 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  7. 


The  first  by  Phoebus'  burning  arrows  fir'd. 

New  from  his  nuptials,  hapless  youth  !  expir'd. 

No  son  surviv'd :  Arete  heir'd  his  state, 

And  her,  Alcinous  chose  his  royal  mate. 

With  honours  yet  to  womankind  unknown, 

This  queen  he  graces,  and  divides  the  throne : 

In  equal  tenderness  her  sons  conspire, 

And  all  the  children  emulate  their  sire. 

When  through  the  street  she  gracious  deigns  to  move, 

(The  public  wonder,  and  the  public  love) 

The  tongues  of  all  with  transport  sound  her  praise, 

The  eyes  of  all,  as  on  a  goddess  gaze. 

She  feels  the  triumph  of  a  generous  breast,  ^ 

To  heal  divisions,  to  relieve  th'  oppress'd  ;  > 

In  virtue  rich  ;  in  blessing  others  bless'd.  } 

Go  then  secure,  thy  humble  suit  prefer, 

And  owe  thy  country  and  thy  friends  to  her." 

With  that  the  goddess  deign'd  no  longer  stay, 
But  o'er  the  world  of  waters  wing'd  her  way : 
Forsaking  Scheria's  ever- pleasing  shore, 
The  winds  to  Marathon  the  virgin  bore  ; 
Thence,  where  proud  Athens  rears  her  towery  head, 
With  opening  streets  and  shining  structures  spread, 
She  pass'd,  delighted  with  the  well-known  seats  j 
And  to  Erectheus*  sacred  dome  retreats. 

Meanwhile  Ulysses  at  the  palace  waits,  } 
There  stops,  and  anxious  with  his  soul  debates,  > 
Fix'd  in  amaze  before  the  royal  gates.  3 
The  front  appear'd  with  radiant  splendours  gay, 
Bright  as  the  lamp  of  night,  or  orb  of  day. 
The  walls  were  massy  brass :  the  cornice  high 
Blue  metals  crown'd  in  colours  of  the  sky  : 
Rich  plates  of  gold  the  folding  doors  incase ; 
The  pillars  silver,  on  a  brazen  base ; 
Silver,  the  lintels  deep-projecting  o'er, 
And  gold,  the  ringlets  that  command  the  door. 


Book  7. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


125 


Two  rows  of  stately  dogs,  on  either  hand, 

In  sculptur'd  gold  and  labour'd  silver  stand. 

These  Vulcan  form'd  with  art  divine,  to  wait 

Immortal  guardians  at  Alcinous'  gate  ; 

Alive  each  animated  frame  appears, 

And  still  to  live  beyond  the  power  of  years. 

Fair  thrones  within  from  space  to  space  were  rais'd, 

Where  various  carpets  with  embroidery  blaz'd, 

The  work  of  matrons  :  these  the  princes  press'd, 

Day  following  day,  a  long  continued  feast. 

Refulgent  pedestals  the  walls  surround, 

Which  boys  of  gold  with  flaming  torches  crown'd  ; 

The  polish'd  ore,  reflecting  every  ray, 

Blaz'd  on  the  banquets  with  a  double  day. 

Pull  fifty  handmaids  form  the  household  train ; 

Some  turn  the  mill,  or  sift  the  golden  grain  ; 

Some  ply  the  loom  ;  their  buzy  fingers  move 

Like  poplar  leaves,  when  Zephyr  fans  the  grove. 

Not  more  renown' d  the  men  of  Scheria's  isle, 

For  sailing  arts  and  all  the  naval  toil, 

Than  works  of  female  skill  their  women's  pride, 

The  flying  shuttle  through  the  threads  to  guide : 

Pallas  to  these  her  double  gifts  imparts, 

Inventive  genius,  and  industrious  arts. 

Close  to  the  gates  a  spacious  garden  lies, 
From  storms  defended  and  inclement  skies. 
Four  acres  was  th'  allotted  space  of  ground, 
Fenc'd  with  a  green  enclosure  all  around  : 
Tall  thriving  trees  confess'd  the  fruitful  mould  ; 
The  reddening  apple  ripens  here  to  gold  : 
Here  the  blue  fig  with  luscious  juice  o'erflows, 
With  deeper  red  the  full  pomegranate  glows, 
The  branch  here  bends  beneath  the  weighty  pear, 
And  verdant  olives  flourish  round  the  year. 
The  balmy  spirit  of  the  western  gale 
Eternal  breathes  on  fruits  untaught  to  fail : 


126 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  7. 


Each  dropping  pear  a  following  pear  supplies, 
On  apples  apples,  figs  on  figs  arise : 
The  same  mild  season  gives  the  blooms  to  blow, 
The  buds  to  harden,  and  the  fruits  to  grow. 

Here  order'd  vines  in  equal  ranks  appear, 
With  all  th'  united  labours  of  the  year : 
Some  to  unload  the  fertile  branches  run  ; 
Some  dry  the  blackening  clusters  in  the  sun, 
Others  to  tread  the  liquid  harvest  join, 
The  groaning  presses  foam  with  floods  of  wine. 
Here  are  the  vines  in  early  flower  descried,  } 
Here  grapes  discolour'd  on  the  sunny  side,  > 
And  there  in  autumn's  richest  purple  dyed.  ) 

Beds  of  all  various  herbs,  for  ever  green, 
In  beauteous  order  terminate  the  scene. 

Two  plenteous  fountains  the  whole  prospect  'J 
crown'd;  [around,  I 

This  through  the  gardens  leads  its  streams  f" 
Visits  each  plant,  and  waters  all  the  ground ;  J 
While  that  in  pipes  beneath  the  palace  flows, 
And  thence  its  current  on  the  town  bestows  : 
To  various  use  their  various  streams  they  bring, 
The  people  one,  and  one  supplies  the  king. 

Such  were  the  glories  which  the  gods  ordain'd, 
To  grace  Alcinous,  and  his  happy  land  ! 
E'en  from  the  chief,  who  men  and  nations  knew, 
Th5  unwonted  scene  surprise  and  rapture  drew; 
In  pleasing  thought  he  ran  the  prospect  o'er, 
Then  hasty  enter'd  at  the  lofty  door  ; 
Night  now  approaching,  in  the  palace  stand, 
With  goblets  crown'd,  the  rulers  of  the  land  ; 
Prepar'd  for  rest,  and  offering  to  the  god 
Who  bears  the  virtue  of  the  sleepy  rod. 
Unseen  he  glided  through  the  joyous  crowd, 
With  darkness  circled,  and  an  ambient  cloud. 


Book  7. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Direct  to  great  Alcinous'  throne  he  came, 
And  prostrate  fell  before  th'  imperial  dame. 
Then  from  around  him  dropp'd  the  veil  of  night ; 
Sudden  he  shines,  and  manifest  to  sight. 
The  nobles  gaze,  with  awful  fear  oppress'd ; 
Silent  they  gaze,  and  eye  the  godlike  guest. 

"  Daughter  of  great  Rhexenor !  (thus  began, 
Low  at  her  knees,  the  much-enduring  man) 
To  thee,  thy  consort,  and  this  royal  train, 
To  all  that  share  the  blessings  of  your  reign, 
A  suppliant  bends !  O  pity  human  wo  ! 
'Tis  what  the  happy  to  th'  unhappy  owe. 
A  wretched  exile  to  his  country  send, 
Long  worn  with  griefs,  and  long  without  a  friend. 
So  may  the  gods  your  better  days  increase, 
And  all  your  joys  descend  on  al1  your  race ; 
So  reign  for  ever  on  your  country's  breast, 
Your  people  blessing,  by  your  people  bless'd  !" 

Then  to  the  genial  hearth  he  bow'd  his  face, 
And  humbled  in  the  ashes  took  his  place. 
Silence  ensued.    The  eldest  first  began, 
Echeneus  sage,  a  venerable  man  ! 
Whose  well-taught  mind  the  present  age  surpass' d 
And  join'd  to  that  th'  experience  of  the  last. 
Fit  words  attended  on  his  weighty  sense, 
And  mild  persuasion  flow'd  in  eloquence. 

"Oh  sight,  (he  cried)  dishonest  and  unjust ! 
A  guest,  a  stranger  seated  in  the  dust ! 
To  raise  the  lowly  suppliant  from  the  ground 
Befits  a  monarch.    Lo  !  the  peers  around 
But  wait  thy  word,  the  gentle  guest  to  grace, 
And  seat  him  fair  in  some  distinguished  place. 
Let  first  the  herald  due  libation  pay 
To  Jove,  who  guides  the  wanderer  on  his  way  ; 
Then  set  the  genial  banquet  in  his  view, 
And  give  the  stranger-guest  a  stranger's  due." 


128 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  7. 


His  sage  advice  the  listening  king  obeys ; 
He  stretch'd  his  hand  the  prudent  chief  to  raise, 
And  from  his  seat  Laodamas  remov'd, 
(The  monarch's  offspring,  and  his  best  belov'd) 
There  next  his  side  the  godlike  hero  sat : 
With  stars  of  silver  shone  the  bed  of  state. 
The  golden  ewer  a  beauteous  handmaid  brings, 
Replenish'd  from  the  cool  translucent  springs, 
Whose  polishM  vase  with  copious  streams  supplies 
A  silver  laver,  of  capacious  size. 
The  table  next  in  regal  order  spread, 
The  glittering  canisters  are  heap'd  with  bread  : 
Viands  of  various  kinds  invite  the  taste, 
Of  choicest  sort  and  savour,  rich  repast ! 
Thus  feasting  high,  Alcinous  gave  the  sign, 
And  bade  the  herald  pour  the  rosy  wine. 
"  Let  all  around  the  due  libation  pay 
To  Jove,  who  guides  the  wanderer  on  his  way." 

He  said.    Pontonus  heard  the  king's  command  : 
The  circling  goblet  moves  from  hand  to  hand: 
Each  drinks  the  juice  that  glads  the  heart  of  man. 
Alcinous  then,  with  aspect  mild,  began: 

"  Princes  and  peers,  attend !  while  we  impart 
To  you  the  thoughts  of  no  inhuman  heart. 
Now  pleas'd  and  satiate  from  the  social  rite 
Repair  we  to  the  blessings  of  the  night : 
But  with  the  rising  day,  assembled  here, 
Let  all  the  elders  of  the  land  appear, 
Pious  observe  our  hospitable  laws, 
And  heaven  propitiate  in  the  stranger's  cause  : 
Then  join' d  in  council,  proper  means  explore, 
Safe  to  transport  him  to  the  wish'd-for  shore  : 
(How  distant  that,  imports  not  us  to  know, 
Nor  weigh  the  labour,  but  relieve  the  wo) 
Meantime,  nor  harm  nor  anguish  let  him  bear  : 
This  interval,  heaven  trusts  him  to  our  care ; 


Book  7.  THE    ODYSSEY.  ]29 

But  to  his  native  land  our  charge  resign'd, 
Heaven's  is  his  life  to  come,  and  all  the  woes  behind. 
Then  must  he  suffer  what  the  fates  ordain  ; 
For  fate  has  wove  the  thread  of  life  with  pain, 
And  twins,  e'en  from  the  birth,  are  misery  and  man  ! 

"  But  if,  descended  from  th'  Olympian  bower, 
Gracious  approach  us  some  immortal  power  ; 
If  in  that  form  thou  com'st  a  guest  divine, 
Some  high  event  the  conscious  gods  design. 
As  yet,  unbid  they  never  grac'd  our  feast, 
The  solemn  sacrifice  call'd  down  the  guest ; 
Then  manifest  of  heaven  the  vision  stood, 
And  to  our  eyes  familiar  was  the  god. 
Oft  with  some  favour'd  traveller  they  stray, 
And  shine  before  him  all  the  desert  way : 
With  social  intercourse,  and  face  to  face, 
The  friends  and  guardians  of  our  pious  race. 
So  near  approach  we  their  celestial  kind, 
By  justice,  truth,  and  probity  of  mind  ; 
As  our  dire  neighbours  of  Cyclopsean  birth 
Match  in  fierce  wrong  the  giant-sons  of  earth. " 

"  Let  no  such  thought  (with  modest  grace  rejoin'd 
The  prudent  Greek)  possess  the  royal  mind. 
Alas !  a  mortal,  like  thyself,  am  I ; 
No  glorious  native  of  yon  azure  sky  : 
In  form,  ah,  how  unlike  their  heavenly  kind  ! 
How  more  inferior  in  the  gifts  of  mind  ! 
Alas,  a  mortal!  most  oppress 'd  of  those 
Whom  fate  has  loaded  with  a  weight  of  woes ; 
By  a  sad  train  of  miseries  alone 
Distinguish'd  long,  and  second  now  to  none  ! 
By  heaven's  high  will  qompelPd  from  shore  to  shore  ; 
With  heaven's  high  will  prepar'd  to  suffer  more. 
What  histories  of  toil  could  I  declare  ? 
But  still  long-wearied  nature  wants  repair  ; 
I 


130 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  7. 


Spent  with  fatigue,  and  shrunk  with  pining  fast, 
My  craving  bowels  still  require  repast. 
Howe'er  the  noble,  suffering  mind,  may  grieve 
Its  load  of  anguish,  and  disdain  to  live  ; 
Necessity  demands  our  daily  bread  ; 
Hunger  is  insolent,  and  will  be  fed. 
But  finish,  O  ye  peers  !  what  you  propose, 
And  let  the  morrow's  dawn  conclude  my  woes: 
Pleas' d  will  1  suffer  all  the  gods  ordain, 
To  see  my  soil,  my  son,  my  friends,  again. 
That  view  vouchsaf'd,  let  instant  death  surprise 
With  ever-during  shade  these  happy  eyes  !'' 

Th'  assembled  peers  with  general  praise  approv'd 
His  pleaded  reason,  and  the  suit  he  mov'd. 
Each  drinks  a  full  oblivion  of  his  cares, 
And  to  the  gifts  of  balmy  sleep  repairs. 
Ulysses  in  the  regal  walls  alone  } 
Remain'd  :  beside  him,  on  a  splendid  throne,  > 
Divine  Arete  and  Alcinous  shone.  ) 
The  queen,  on  nearer  view,  the  guest  survey 'd 
Rob'd  in  the  garments  her  own  hands  had  made ; 
Not  without  wonder  seen.    Then  thus  began, 
Her  words  addressing  to  the  godlike  man  : 

"  Cam'st  thou  not  hither,  wondrous  stranger !  say, 
From  lands  remote,  and  o'er  a  length  of  sea  ? 
Tell  then  whence  art  thou?  whence  that  princely  air? 
And  robes  like  these,  so  recent  and  so  fair  V 

"Hard  is  the  task,  O  princess!  you  impose, 
(Thus  sighing  spoke  the  man  of  many  woes) 
The  long,  the  mournful  series  to  relate 
Of  all  my  sorrows,  sent  by  heaven  and  fate ! 
Yet  what  you  ask,  attend.    An  island  lies 
Beyond  these  tracts,  and  under  other  skies, 
Ogygia  nam'd,  in  ocean's  wat'ry  arms; 
Where  dwells  Calypso,  dreadful  in  her  charms  ! 
Remote  from  gods  or  men  she  holds  her  reign, 


Book  7. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Amid  the  terrors  of  the  rolling  main. 
y\e,  only  me,  the  hand  of  fortune  bore, 
Unbless'd  !  to  tread  that  interdicted  shore, 
When  Jove  tremendous  in  the  sable  deeps 
Launch' d  his  red  lightning  at  our  scatter'd  ships  : 
Then,  all  my  fleet,  and  all  my  followers  lost, 
Sole  on  a  plank,  on  boiling  surges  toss'd, 
Heaven  drove  my  wreck  th'  Ogygian  isle  to  find, 
Full  nine  days  floating  to  the  wave  and  wind. 
Met  by  the  goddess  there  with  open  arms, 
She  brib'd  my  stay  with  more  than  human  charms 
Nay  promis'd,  vainly  promis'd,  to  bestow 
Immortal  life,  exempt  from  age  and  wo, 
But  all  her  blandishments  successless  prove, 
To  banish  from  my  breast  my  country's  love. 
I  stay  reluctant  seven  continued  years, 
And  water  her  ambrosial  couch  with  tears. 
The  eighth,  she  voluntary  moves  to  part, 
Or  urg'd  by  Jove,  or  her  own  changeful  heart. 
A  raft  was  form'd  to  cross  the  surging  sea ;  } 
Herself  supplied  the  stores  and  rich  array ;  > 
And  gave  the  gales  to  waft  me  on  the  way.  ) 
In  seventeen  days  appear'd  your  pleasing  coast, 
And  woody  mountains  half  in  vapours  lost. 
Joy  touch'd  my  soul:  my  soul  was  joy'd  in  vain, 
For  angry  Neptune  rous'd  the  raging  main  ; 
The  wild  winds  whistle,  and  the  billows  roar  ;  } 
The  splitting  raft  the  furious  tempest  tore  ;  > 
And  storms  vindictive  intercept  the  shore.  J 
Soon  as  their  rage  subsides,  the  seas  I  brave 
With  naked  force,  and  shoot  along  the  wave, 
To  reach  this  isle  :  but  there  my  hopes  were  lost, 
The  surge  impell'd  me  on  a  craggy  coast. 
I  chose  the  saier  sea,  and  chanc'd  to  find 
A  river's  mouth  impervious  to  the  wind, 
And  clear  of  rocks.    I  fainted  by  the  flood 


132 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  7. 


Then  took  the  shelter  of  the  neighbouring  wood. 

'Twas  night;  and  cover'  in  the  foliage  deep, 

Jove  plung'd  my  senses  in  the  death  of  sleep. 

All  night  1  slept,  oblivious  of  my  pain : 

Aurora  dawn'd,  and  Phoebus  shin'd  in  vain, 

Nor  till  oblique  he  slop'd  his  evening  ray, 

Had  Somnus  dried  the  balmy  dews  away. 

Then  female  voices  from  the  shore  I  heard : 

A  maid  amidst,  them,  goddess-like,  appear'd: 

To  her  I  sued,  she  pitied  my  distress  ; 

Like  thee  in  beauty,  nor  in  virtue  less. 

Who  from  such  youth  could  hope  considerate  care  1 

In  youth  and  beauty  wisdom  is  but  rare  ! 

She  gave  me  life,  reliev'd  with  just  supplies 

JVly  wants,  and  lent  these  robes  that  strike  your  eyes. 

This  is  the  truth:  and  oh,  ye  powers  on  high! 

Forbid  that  want  should  sink  me  to  a  lie." 

To  this  the  king  :  "  Our  daughter  but  express'd 
Her  cares  imperfect  to  our  godlike  guest. 
Suppliant  to  her,  since  first  he  chose  to  pray, 
Why  not  herself  did  she  conduct  the  way, 
And  with  her  handmaids  to  our  court  convey  V 

"  Hero  and  king !  (Ulysses  thus  replied) 
Nor  blame  her,  faultless,  nor  suspect  of  pride : 
She  bade  me  follow  in  th'  attendant  train ; 
But  fear  and  reverence  did  my  steps  detain, 
Lest  rash  suspicion  might  alarm  thy  mind  : 
Man's  of  a  jealous  and  mistaken  kind." 

"  Far  from  my  soul  (he  cried)  the  gods  efface 
All  wrath  ill-grounded,  and  suspicion  base  ! 
Whate'er  is  honest,  stranger,  I  approve ; 
And  would  to  Phcebus,  Pallas,  and  to  Jove, 
Such  as  thou  art,  thy  thought  and  mine  were  one, 
Nor  thou  unwilling  to  be  call'd  my  son  : 
In  such  alliance  couldst  thou  wish  to  join, 
A  palace  stor'd  with  treasures  should  be  thine, 


Book  7. 


THE    ODYSSE  Y  . 


133 


But  if  reluctant,  who  shall  force  thy  stay?  } 
Jove  bids  to  set  the  stranger  on  his  way,  > 
And  ships  shall  wait  thee  with  the  morning  ray.  ) 
Till  then,  let  slumbers  close  thy  careful  eyes ;  1 
The  wakeful  mariners  shall  watch  the  skies,  > 
And  seize  the  moment  when  the  breezes  rise  :  ) 
Then  gently  waft  thee  to  the  pleasing  shore, 
Where  thy  soul  rests,  and  labour  is  no  more. 
Far  as  Eubcea  though  thy  country  lay, 
Our  ships  with  ease  transport  thee  in  a  day. 
Thither  of  old,  Earth's  giant-son  to  view, 
On  wings  of  wind  with  Rhadamanth  they  flew : 
This  land,  from  whence  their  morning  course  begun, 
Saw  them  returning  with  the  setting  sun. 
Your  eyes  shall  witness  and  confirm  my  tale, 
Our  youth  how  dext'rous,  and  how  fleet  our  sail, 
When  justly  tim'd  with  equal  sweep  they  row, 
And  ocean  whitens  in  long  tracks  below." 

Thus  he.    No  word  th*  experienc'd  man  replies, 
But  thus  to  heaven  (and  heavenward  lifts  his  eyes :) 
11  O  Jove  !  O  father !  what  the  king  accords 
Do  thou  make  perfect !  sacred  be  his  words  ! 
Wide  o'er  the  world  Alcinous*  glory  shine ; 
Let  fame  be  his,  and  ah  !  my  country  mine  \n 
Meantime  Arete,  for  the  hour  of  rest, 
Ordains  the  fleecy  couch,  and  covering  vest : 
Bids  her  fair  train  the  purple  quilts  prepare, 
And  the  thick  carpets  spread  with  busy  care. 
With  torches  blazing  in  their  hands  they  pass'd. 
And  finish'd  all  their  queen's  command  with  haste: 
Then  gave  the  signal  to  the  willing  guest  : 
He  rose  with  pleasure,  and  retir'd  to  rest. 
There,  soft-extended,  to  the  murmuring  sound 
Of  the  high  porch,  Ulysses  sleeps  profound  ! 
Within,  releas'd  from  cares  Alcinous  lies  ; 
And  fast  beside,  were  clos'd  Arete's  eyes. 


BOOK  VIII. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

ALC1NOUS  calls  a  council,  in  which  it  is  resolved  to  transport 
Ulysses  into  his  country.  After  which  splendid  entertainments 
are  made,  where  the  celebrated  musician  and  poet  Demodocus 
plays  and  sings  to  the  guests.  They  next  proceed  to  the  games, 
the  race,  the  wrestling,  discus,  &c,  where  Ulysses  casts  a  prodi- 
gious length,  to  the  admiration  of  all  the  spectators.  They  return 
again  to  the  banquet,  and  Demodocus  sings  the  loves  of  Mars  and 
Venus.  Ulysses,  after  a  compliment  to  the  poet,  desires  him  to 
sing  the  introduction  of  the  wooden  horse  into  Troy  ;  which  sub- 
ject provoking  his  tears,  Alcinous  inquires  of  his  guest  his  name, 
parentage,  and  fortunes. 

Now  fair  Aurora  lifts  her  golden  ray, 
And  all  the  ruddy  orient  flames  with  day : 
Alcinous,  and  the  chief,  with  dawning  light, 
Rose  instant  from  the  slumbers  of  the  night; 
Then  to  the  council-seat  they  bend  their  way, 
And  fill  the  shining  thrones  along  the  bay. 
Meanwhile  Minerva,  in  her  guardian  care, 
Shoots  from  the  starry  vault  through  fields  of  air; 
In  form  the  herald  of  the  king,  she  flies 
From  peer  to  peer,  and  thus  incessant  cries : 

"  Nobles  and  chiefs  who  rule  Phaeacia's  states, 
The  king  in  council  your  attendance  wait* : 


136 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


A  prince  of  grace  divine  your  aid  implores, 

O'er  unknown  seas  arriv'd  from  unknown  shores." 

She  spoke,  and  sudden  with  tumultuous  sounds 
Of  thronging  multitudes  the  shore  rebounds  : 
At  once  the  seats  they  fill :  and  every  eye 
Gaz'd  as  before  some  brother  of  the  sky. 
Pallas  with  grace  divine  his  form  improves, 
More  high  he  treads,  and  more  enlarg'd  he  moves : 
She  sheds  celestial  bloom,  regard  to  draw  ; 
And  gives  a  dignity  of  mien  to  awe ; 
With  strength,  the  future  prize  of  fame  to  play, 
And  gather  all  the  honours  of  the  day. 

Then  from  his  glittering  throne  Alcinous'rose  : 
(C  Attend  (he  cried)  while  we  our  will  disclose. 
Your  present  aid  this  godlike  stranger  craves, 
Tost  by  rude  tempest  through  a  war  of  waves , 
Perhaps  from  realms  that  view  the  rising  day, 
Or  nations  subject  to  the  western  ray. 
Then  grant,  what  here  all  sons  of  wo  obtain 
(For  here  affliction  never  pleads  in  vain.) 
Be  chosen  youths  prepar'd,  expert  to  try 
The  vast  profound,  and  bid  the  vessel  fly : 
Launch  the  tall  bark,  and  order  every  oar ; 
Then  in  our  court  indulge  the  genial  hour. 
Instant,  you  sailors,  to  this  task  attend  ; 
Swift  to  the  palace,  all  ye  peers  ascend  ; 
Let  none  to  strangers  honours  due  disclaim  : 
Be  there  Demodocus,  the  bard  of  fame, 
Taught  by  the  gods  to  please,  when  high  he  sings 
The  vocal  lay,  responsive  to  the  strings." 

Thus  spoke  the  prince  :  th'  attending  peers  obey, 
In  state  they  move  ;  Alcinous  leads  the  way : 
Swift  to  Demodocus  the  herald  flies, 
At  once  the  sailors  to  their  charge  arise  ; 
They  launch  the  vessel,  and  unlirl  the  sails, 
And  stretch  the  swelling  canvass  to  the  gales ; 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


137 


Then  to  the  palace  move  a  gathering  throng, 

Youth,  and  white  age,  tumultuous  pour  along  : 

Now  all  accesses  to  the  dome  are  fill'd  ; 

Eight  boars,  the  choicest  of  the  herd,  are  kill'd : 

Two  beeves,  twelve  fatlings  from  the  flock,  they  bring 

To  crown  the  feast ;  so  wills  the  bounteous  king. 

The  herald  now  arrives,  and  guides  along 

The  sacred  master  of  celestial  song : 

Dear  to  the  muse  !  who  gave  his  days  to  flow 

"With  mighty  blessings,  mix'd  with  mighty  woe : 

With  clouds  of  darkness  quench'd  his  visual  ray, 

But  gave  him  skill  to  raise  the  lofty  lay. 

High  on  a  radiant  throne  sublime  in  state. 

Encircled  by  huge  multitudes,  he  sat : 

With  silver  shone  the  throne  ;  his  lyre,  well  strung 

To  rapturous  sounds,  at  hand  Pontonous  hung : 

Before  his  seat  a  polish'd  table  shines, 

And  a  full  goblet  foams  with  generous  wines : 

His  food  a  herald  bore  :  and  now  they  fed  ; 

And  now  the  rage  of  craving  hunger  fled. 

Then  hYd  by  all  the  muse,  aloud  he  sings 
The  mighty  deeds  of  demigods  and  kings  : 
From  that  fierce  wrath  the  noble  song  arose, 
That  made  Ulysses  and  Achilles  foes  : 
How  o'er  the  feast  they  doom  the  fall  of  Troy ; 
The  stern  debate  Atrides  hears  with  joy : 
For  heaven  foretold  the  contest,  when  he  trod 
The  marble  threshold  of  the  delphic  god, 
Curious  to  learn  the  councils  of  the  sky, 
Ere  yet  he  loos' d  the  rage  of  war  on  Troy. 

Touch'd  at  the  song,  Ulysses  straight  resign'd 
To  soft  affliction  all  his  manly  mind  : 
Before  his  eyes  the  purple  vest  he  drew, 
Industrious  to  conceal  the  falling  dew  : 
But  when  the  music  paus'd,  he  ceas'd  to  shed 
The  flowing  tear,  and  rais'd  his  drooping  head : 


138 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


And  lifting  to  the  gods  a  goblet  crown'd, 
He  pour'd  a  pure  libation  to  the  ground. 

Transported  with  the  song,  the  listening  train 
Again  with  loud  applause  demand  the  strain  : 
Again  Ulysses  veil'd  his  pensive  head, 
Again,  unmann'd,  a  shower  of  sorrow  shed  : 
Conceal'd  he  wept :  the  king  observ'd  alone 
The  silent  tear,  and  heard  the  secret  groan  : 
Then  to  the  bard  aloud :  "  O  cease  to  sing, 
Dumb  be  thy  voice,  and  mute  th'  harmonious  string  ; 
Enough  the  feast  has  pleas'd,  enough  the  pow'r 
Of  heavenly  song  has  crown'd  the  genial  hour  ! 
Incessant  in  the  games  your  strength  display, 
Contest,  ye  brave,  the  honours  of  the  day  ! 
That  pleas'd  th'  admiring  stranger  may  proclaim 
In  distant  regions  the  Phaeacian  fame  : 
None  wield  the  gauntlet  with  so  dire  a  sway, 
Or  swifter  in  the  race  devour  the  way  ; 
None  in  the  leap  spring  with  so  strong  a  bound, 
Or  firmer,  in  the  wrestling,  press  the  ground." 

Thus  spoke  the  king :  th'  attending  peers  obey. 
In  state  they  move  ;  Alcinous  leads  the  way : 
His  golden  lyre  Demodocus  unstrung, 
High  on  a  column  in  the  palace  hung  ; 
And  guided  by  a  herald's  guardian  cares, 
Majestic  to  the  lists  of  fame  repairs. 

Now  swarms  the  populace  ;  a  countless  throng, 
Youth  and  hoar  age ;  and  man  drives  man  along ; 
The  games  begin  ;  ambitious  of  the  prize, 
Acroneus,  Thoon,  and  Eretmeus  rise ; 
The  prize  Ocyalus  and  Prymneus  claim, 
Anchialus  and  Ponteus,  chiefs  of  fame: 
There  Proreus,  Nautes,  Eratreus  appear, 
And  fam'd  Amphialus,  Polyneus'  heir : 
Euryalus,  like  Mars  terrific,  rose, 
When  clad  in  wrath  he  withers  hosts  of  foes : 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


139 


Naubolides  with  grace  unequal  shone 

Or  equall'd  by  Laodamas  alone. 

With  these  came  forth  Ambasineus  the  strong, 

And  three  brave  sons  from  great  Alcinous  sprung. 

Rang'd  in  a  line  the  ready  racers  stand, 
Start  from  the  goal,  and  vanish  o'er  the  strand  : 
Swift  as  on  wings  of  wind  upborne  they  fly, 
And  drifts  of  rising  dust  involve  the  sky  : 
Before  the  rest,  what  space  the  hinds  allow 
Between  the  mule  and  ox,  from  plough  to  plough, 
Clytoneus  sprung  :  he  wing'd  the  rapid  way, 
And  bore  th'  unrival'd  honours  of  the  day. 
With  fierce  embrace  the  brawny  wrestlers  join  : 
The  conquest,  great  Euryalus,  is  thine, 
Amphialus  sprung  forward  with  a  bound, 
Superior  in  the  leap  a  length  of  ground : 
From  Eratreus'  strong  arm  the  discus  flies, 
And  sings  with  unmatch'd  force  along  the  skies. 
And  Laodam  whirls  high,  with  dreadful  sway, 
The  gloves  of  death,  victorious  in  the  fray. 

While  thus  the  peerage  in  the  games  contends, 
In  act  to  speak  Laodamas  ascends : 

"  O  friends  (he  cries,)  the  stranger  seems  well  skill'd 
To  try  th'  illustrious  labours  of  the  field  : 
1  deem  him  brave ;  then  grant  the  brave  man's  claim, 
Invite  the  hero  to  his  share  of  fame. 
What  nervous  arms  he  boasts  !  how  firm  his  tread ! 
His  limbs  how  turn'd  !  how  broad  his  shoulders  spread  ! 
By  age  unbroke  ! — but  all-consuming  care 
Destroys  perhaps  the  strength  that  time  would  spare  : 
Dire  is  the  ocean,  dread  in  all  its  forms ! 
Man  must  decay,  when  man  contends  with  storms.'' 

"  Well  hast  thou  spoke  (Euryalus  replies,) 
Thine  is  the  guest,  invite  him  thou  to  rise." 
Swift  at  the  word  advancing  from  the  crowd 
He  made  obeisance,  and  thus  spoke  aloud  j 


140 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


"  Vouchsafes  the  reverend  stranger  to  display 
His  manly  worth,  and  share  the  glorious  day  % 
Father,  arise  !  for  thee  thy  port  proclaims 
Expert  to  conquer  in  the  solemn  games. 
To  fame  arise  !  for  what  more  fame  can  yield 
Than  the  swift  race,  or  conflict  of  the  field  1 
Steal  from  corroding  care  one  transient  day, 
To  glory  give  the  space  thou  hast  to  stay  ; 
Short  is  the  time,  and  lo  !  e'en  now  the  gales 
Call  thee  abroad,  and  stretch  the  swelling  sails." 

To  whom  with  sighs  Ulysses  gave  reply : 
"  Ah  why  th'  ill-suiting  pastime  must  1  try  ? 
To  gloomy  care  my  thoughts  alone  are  free ; 
III  the  gay  sports  with  troubled  hearts  agree : 
Sad  from  my  natal  hour  my  days  have  ran, 
A  much-afflicted,  much-enduring  man  ! 
Who  suppliant  to  the  king  and  peers,  implores 
A  speedy  voyage  to  his  native  shores." 

"  Wide  wanders,  Laodam,  thy  erring  tongue, 
The  sports  of  glory  to  the  brave  belong 
(Retorts  Euryalus  :)  he  boasts  no  claim 
Among  the  great,  unlike  the  sons  of  fame. 
A  wandering  merchant  he  frequents  the  main, 
Some  mean  sea-farer  in  pursuit  of  gain  ; 
Studious  of  freight,  in  naval  trade  well  skill'd, 
But  dreads  th'  athletic  labours  of  the  field." 

lncens'd  Ulysses  with  a  frown  replies  : 
"  O  forward  to  proclaim  thy  soul  unwise  ! 
With  partial  hands  the  gods  their  gifts  dispense  : 
Some  greatly  think,  some  speak  with  manly  sense  ; 
Here  heaven  an  elegance  of  form  denies, 
But  wisdom  the  defect  of  form  supplies  : 
This  man  with  energy  of  thought  controls, 
And  steals  with  modest  violence  our  souls, 
He  speaks  reserv'dly,  but  he  speaks  with  force, 
Nor  can  one  word  be  chang'd  but  for  a  worse ; 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


In  public  more  than  mortal  he  appears, 

And  as  he  moves  the  gazing  crowd  reveres  : 

While  others,  beauteous  as  th'  ethereal  kind, 

The  nobler  portion  want,  a  knowing  mind. 

In  outward  show  heaven  gives  thee  to  excel, 

But  heaven  denies  the  praise  of  thinking  well. 

Ill  bear  the  brave  a  rude  ungovern'd  tongue, 

And,  youth,  my  generous  soul  resents  the  wrong: 

Skill'd  in  heroic  exercise,  I  claim 

A  post  of  honour  with  the  sons  of  fame: 

Such  was  my  boast  while  vigour  crown'd  my  days, 

Now  care  surrounds  me,  and  my  force  decays; 

Inur'd  a  melancholy  part  to  bear, 

In  scenes  of  death,  by  tempest  and  by  war. 

Yet  thus  by  woes  impair'd,  no  more  I  wave 

To  prove  the  hero.— Slander  stings  the  brave." 

Then  striding  forward  with  a  furious  bound, 
He  wrenchM  a  rocky  fragment  from  the  ground, 
By  far  more  ponderous,  and  more  huge  by  far, 
Than  what  Phaeacia's  sons  discharg'd  in  air. 
Fierce  from  his  arm  th'  enormous  load  he  flings ; 
Sonorous  through  the  shaded  air  it  sings  : 
Couch'd  to  the  earth,  tempestuous  as  it  flies, 
The  crowd  gaze  upward  while  it  cleaves  the  skies. 
Beyond  all  marks,  with  many  a  giddy  round 
Down  rushing,  it  upturns  a  hill  of  ground. 

That  instant  Pallas,  bursting  from  a  cloud, 
Fix'd  a  distinguished  mark,  and  cried  aloud : 

"  E'en  he  who  sightless  wants  his  visual  ray, 
May  by  his  touch  alone  award  the  day  : 
Thy  signal  throw  transcends  the  utmost  bound 
Of  every  champion  by  a  length  of  ground  : 
Securely  bid  the  strongest  of  the  train 
Arise  to  throw :  the  strongest  throws  in  vain." 

She  spoke ;  and  momentary  mounts  the  sky  : 
The  friendly  voice  Ulysses  hears  with  joy  \ 


142 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


Then  thus  aloud,  elate  with  decent  pride  : 

"  Rise,  ye  Phasacians,  try  your  force  (he  cried  ;) 

If  with  this  throw  the  strongest  caster  vie, 

Still,  further  still,  I  bid  the  discus  fly. 

Stand  forth,  ye  champions,  who  the  gauntlet  wield, 

Or  you,  the  swiftest  racers  of  the  field  ! 

Stand  forth,  ye  wrestlers  !  who  these  pastimes  grace  I 

1  wield  the  gauntlet,  and  I  run  the  race. 

In  such  heroic  games  I  yield  to  none, 

Or  yield  to  brave  JLaodamas  alone  : 

Shall  I  with  brave  Laodamas  contend  1 

A  friend  is  sacred,  and  I  style  him  friend. 

Ungenerous  were  the  man,  and  base  of  heart, 

Who  takes  the  kind,  and  pays  th'  ungrateful  part : 

Chiefly  the  man  in  foreign  realms  confln'd. 

Base  to  his  friend,  to  his  own  interest  blind  : 

All,  all  your  heroes  I  this  day  defy  ; 

Give  me  a  man,  that  we  our  might  may  try. 

Expert  in  every  art,  I  boast  the  skill 

To  give  the  feather'd  arrow  wings  to  kill ; 

Should  a  whole  host  at  once  discharge  the  bow, 

My  well-aim'd  shaft  with  death  prevents  the  foe: 

Alone  superior  in  the  field  of  Troy, 

Great  Philoctetes  taught  the  shaft  to  fly. 

From  all  the  sons  of  earth  unrivall'd  praise 

I  justly  claim  ;  but  yield  to  better  days, 

To  those  fam'd  days  when  great  Alcides  rose 

And  Eurytus,  who  bade  the  gods  be  foes  : 

(Vain  Eurytus.  whose  art  became  his  crime, 

Swept  from  the  earth,  he  perish'd  in  his  prime  ) 

Sudden  th'  irremeable  way  he  trod, 

Who  boldly  durst  defy  the  bowyer-god) 

In  fighting  fields  as  far  the  spear  I  throw, 

As  files  an  arrow  from  the  well -drawn  bow. 

Sole  in  the  race  the  contest  I  decline, 

Stiff  are  my  weary  joints  ;  and  I  resign, 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


143 


By  storms  and  hunger  worn :  age  well  may  fail, 
When  storms  and  hunger  both  at  once  assail." 

Abash'd  the  numbers  hear  the  godlike  man. 
Till  great  Alcinous  mildly  thus  began  : 

"Well  hast  thou  spoke,  and  well  thy  generous 
With  decent  pride  refutes  a  public  wrong  :  [tongue 
Warm  are  thy  words,  but  warm  without  offence ; 
Fear  only  fools,  secure  in  men  of  sense : 
Thy  worth  is  known.    Then  hear  our  country's  claim, 
And  bear  to  heroes  our  heroic  fame ; 
In  distant  realms  our  glorious  deeds  display, 
Repeat  them  frequent  in  the  genial  day ; 
When  bless'd  with  ease  thy  woes  and  wanderings  end, 
Teach  them  thy  consort,  bid  thy  sons  attend  ; 
How  lov'd  of  Jove  he  crown'd  our  sires  with  praise, 
How  we,  their  offspring,  dignify  our  race. 

"  Let  other  realms  the  deathful  gauntlet  wield, 
Or  boast  the  glories  of  th'  athletic  field  ; 
We  in  the  course  unrivall'd  speed  display, 
Or  through  ccerulean  billows  plough  the  way ; 
To  dress,  to  dance,  to  sing,  our  sole  delight, 
The  feast  or  bath  by  day,  and  love  by  night  : 
Rise  then,  ye  skill'd  in  measures ;  let  him  bear 
Your  fame  to  men  that  breathe  a  distant  air, 
And  faithful  say,  to  you  the  powers  belong 
To  race,  to  sail,  to  dance,  to  chaunt  the  song. 
But,  herald,  to  the  palace  swift  repair, 
And  the  soft  lyre  to  grace  our  pastimes  bear.'5 

Swift  at  the  word,  obedient  to  the  king, 
The  herald  flies  the  tuneful  lyre  to  bring. 
Up  rose  nine  seniors,  chosen  to  survey 
The  future  games,  the  judges  of  the  day  : 
With  instant  care  they  mark  a  spacious  round, 
And  level  for  the  dance  th'  allotted  ground : 
The  herald  bears  the  lyre  :  intent  to  play, 
The  bard  advancing  meditates  the  lay  : 


144 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


Skill'd  in  the  dance,  tall  youths,  a  blooming  band, 
Graceful  before  the  heavenly  minstrel  stand; 
Light-bounding  from  the  earth,  at  once  they  rise, 
Their  feet  half-viewless  quiver  in  the  skies  : 
Ulysses  gaz'd,  astonish'd  to  survey 
The  glancing  splendours  as  their  sandals  play. 
Meantime  the  bard,  alternate  to  the  strings, 
The  loves  of  Mars  and  Cytherea  sings ; 
How  the  stern  god,  enamour'd  with  her  charms, 
Clasp'd  the  gay  panting  goddess  in  his  arms, 
By  bribes  seduc'd :  and  how  the  sun  whose  eye 
Views  the  broad  heavens,  disclos'd  the  lawless  joy. 
Stung  to  the  soul,  indignant  through  the  skies 
To  his  black  forge  vindictive  Vulcan  flies : 
Arriv'd,  his  sinewy  arms  incessant  place 
Th'  eternal  anvil  on  the  massy  base. 
A  wonderous  net  he  labours,  to  betray 
The  wonton  lovers,  as  entwin'd  they  lay  ; 
Indissolubly  strong !  Then  instant  bears 
To  his  immortal  dome  the  finish'd  snares. 
Above,  below,  around,  with  art  dispread, 
The  sure  enclosure  folds  the  genial  bed  ; 
"Whose  texture  e'en  the  search  of  gods  deceives, 
Thin  as  the  filmy  threads  the  spider  weaves. 
Then,  as  withdrawing  from  the  starry  bow'rs, 
He  feigns  a  journey  to  the  Lemnian  shores, 
His  favourite  isle !  Observant  Mars  descries 
His  wish'd  recess,  and  to  the  goddess  flies ; 
He  glows,  he  burns :  the  fair-hair'd  queen  of  love 
Descends  smooth-gliding  from  the  courts  of  Jove, 
Gay  blooming  in  full  charms :  her  hand  he  press'd 
With  eager  joy,  and  with  a  sigh  address'd : 

"  Come,  my  belov'd  !  and  taste  the  soft  delights : 
Come,  to  repose  the  genial  bed  invites  : 
Thy  absent  spouse,  neglectful  of  thy  charms, 
Prefers  his  barbarous  Sintians  to  thy  arms  1" 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


145 


Then,  nothing  loth,  th'  enamour'd  fair  he  led, 
And  sunk  transported  on  the  conscious  bed. 
Down  rush'd  the  toils,  inwrapping  as  they  lay 
The  careless  lovers  in  their  wanton  play  : 
In  vain  they  strive,  th'  intangling  snares  deny 
(Inextricably  firm)  the  power  to  fly. 
Warn'd  by  the  god  who  sheds  the  golden  day. 
Stern  Vulcan  homeward  treads  the  starry  way : 
Arriv'd,  he  sees,  he  grieves,  with  rage  he  burns ; 
Full  horrible  he  roars,  his  voice  all  heaven  returns. 

u  O  Jove  (he  cried)  O  all  ye  powers  above, 
See  the  lewd  dalliance  of  the  queen  of  love  ! 
Me,  awkward  me,  she  scorns,  and  yields  her  charms 
To  that  fair  lecher,  the  strong  god  of  arms. 
If  I  am  lame,  that  stain  my  natal  hour 
By  fate  impos'd  ;  such  me  my  parent  bore  : 
Why  was  1  born  ?  See  how  the  wanton  lies ! 
O  sight  tormenting  to  an  husband's  eyes? 
But  yet,  I  trust,  this  once  e'en  Mars  would  fly 
His  fair-one's  arms — he  thinks  her,  once,  too  nigh. 
But  there  remain,  ye  guilty,  in  my  power, 
Till  Jove  refunds  his  shameless  daughter's  dower. 
Too  dear  I  priz'd  a  fair  enchanting  face  : 
Beauty  unchaste  is  beauty  in  disgrace." 
Meanwhile  the  gods  the  dome  of  Vulcan  throng, 
Apollo  comes,  and  Neptune  comes  along, 
With  these  gay  Hermes  trod  the  starry  plain ; 
But  modesty  withheld  the  goddess-train. 
All  heaven  beholds,  imprison'd  as  they  lie, 
And  unextinguish'd  laughter  shakes  the  sky. 

Then  mutual,  thus  they  spoke  :  "  Behold  on  wrong 
Swift  vengeance  waits ;  and  art  subdues  the  strong  ! 
Dwells  there  a  god  on  all  th'  Olympian  brow 
More  swift  than  Mars,  and  more  than  Vulcan  slow  ? 
Yet  Vulcan  conquers,  and  the  god  of  arms 
Must  pay  the  penalty  for  lawless  charms." 
K 


146 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


Thus  serious  they  :  but  he  who  gilds  the  skies, 
The  gay  Apollo,  thus  to  Hermes  cries  : 
"  Would'st  thou  enchain'd  like  Mars,  O  Hermes  lie, 
And  bear  the  shame  like  Mars,  to  share  the  joy  7" 

"  O  envied  shame  !  (the  smiling  youth  rejoin'd) 
Add  thrice  the  chains,  and  thrice  more  firmly  bind ; 
Gaze  all  ye  gods,  and  every  goddess  gaze, 
Yet  eager  would  1  bless  the  sweet  disgrace." 

Loud  laugh  the  rest,  e'en  Neptune  laughs  aloud, 
Yet  sues  importunate  to  loose  the  god : 
w  And  free  (he  cries)  O  Vulcan  !  free  from  shame 
Thy  captives ;  I  ensure  the  penal  claim." 

"  Will  Neptune  (Vulcan  then)  the  faithless  trust  1 
He  sutlers  who  gives  surety  for  th'  unjust: 
But  say,  if  that  lewd  scandal  of  the  sky, 
To  liberty  restor'd,  perfidious  fly  ; 
Say,  wilt  thou  bear  the  mulct  V*  He  instant  cries, 
"  The  mulct  I  bear,  if  Mars  perfidious  flies. 

To  whom  appeas'd  :  "  No  more  I  urge  delay  ! 
When  Neptune  sues,  my  part  is  to  obey. 
Then  to  the  snares  his  force  the  god  applies ; 
They  burst ;  and  Mars  to  Thrace  indignant  flies  : 
To  the  soft  Cyprian  shores  the  goddess  moves, 
To  visit  Paphos  and  her  blooming  groves, 
Where  to  the  power  an  hundred  altars  rise, 
And  breathing  odours  scent  the  balmy  skies  : 
Conceal'd  she  bathes  in  consecrated  bowers, 
The  Graces  unguents  shed,  ambrosial  showers, 
Unguents  that  charm  the  gods  !  she  last  assumes 
Her  wondrous  robes ;  and  full  the  goddess  blooms. 

Thus  sung  the  bard  :  Ulysses  hears  with  joy, 
And  loud  applauses  rend  the  vaulted  sky. 

Then  to  the  sports  his  sons  the  king  commands  : 
Each  blooming  youth  before  the  monarch  stands, 
In  dance  unmatch'd  !  A  wondrous  ball  is  brought, 
(The  work  of  Poly  bus,  divinely  wrought) 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


147 


This  youth  with  strength  enormous  bids  it  fly, 
And  bending  backward  whirls  it  to  the  sky  ; 
His  brother  springing  with  an  active  bound, 
At  distance  intercepts  it  from  the  ground  : 
The  ball  dismiss'd,  in  dance  they  skim  the  strand, 
Turn  and  return,  and  scarce  imprint  the  sand, 
Th'  assembly  gazes  with  astonish'd  eyes, 
And  send  in  shouts  applauses  to  the  skies. 

Then  thus  Ulysses :  11  Happy  king,  whose  name 
The  brightest  shines  in  all  the  rolls  of  fame : 
In  subjects  happy  !  with  surprise  I  gaze ; 
Thy  praise  was  just ;  their  skill  transcends  thy  praise." 

Pleas'd  with  his  people's  fame  the  monarch  hears, 
And  thus  benevolent  accosts  the  peers  : 
-  Since  wisdom's  sacred  guidance  he  pursues, 
Give  to  the  stranger-guest  a  stranger's  dues : 
Twelve  princes  in  our  realm  dominion  share, 
O'er  whom  supreme,  imperial  power  I  bear : 
Bring  gold,  a  pledge  of  love ;  a  talent  bring, 
A  vest,  a  robe  ;  and  imitate  your  king  : 
Be  swift  to  give ;  that  he  this  night  may  share 
The  social  feast  of  joy,  with  joy  sincere. 
And  thou,  Euryalus,  redeem  thy  wrong  : 
A  generous  heart  repairs  a  slanderous  tongue." 

Th'  assenting  peers,  obedient  to  the  king, 
In  haste  their  heralds  send  the  gifts  to  bring. 
Then  thus  Euryalus:  11  O  prince,  whose  sway 
Rules  this  bless'd  realm,  repentant  I  obey  ! 
Be  his  this  sword,  whose  blade  of  brass  displays 
A  ruddy  gleam  ;  whose  hilt,  a  silver  blaze  ; 
Whose  ivory  sheath,  inwrought  with  curious  pride, 
Adds  graceful  terror  to  the  wearer's  side." 

He  said,  and  to  his  hand  the  sword  consign'd ; 
"  And  if  (he  cried)  my  words  affect  thy  mind, 
Far  from  thy  mind  those  words,  ye  whirlwinds,  bear, 
And  scatter  them,  ye  storms,  in  empty  air ! 


148 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book 


Crown,  O  ye  heavens,  with  joy  his  peaceful  hours, 
And  grant  him  to  his  spouse  and  native  shores  !" 

"  And  bless'd  be  thou,  my  friend,  (Ulysses  cries) 
Crown  him  with  every  joy,  ye  favouring  skies ; 
To  thy  calm  hours  continued  peace  afford, 
And  never,  never  may'st  thou  want  this  sword." 

He  said,  and  o'er  his  shoulder  flung  the  blade. 
Now  o'er  the  earth  ascends  the  evening  shade  : 
The  precious  gifts  th'  illustrious  heralds  bear, 
And  to  the  court  th'  embodied  peers  repair. 
Before  the  queen  Alcinous'  sons  unfold 
The  vests,  the  robes,  and  heaps  of  shining  gold; 
Then  to  the  radiant  thrones  they  move  in  state  : 
Aloft,  the  king  in  pomp  imperial  sat. 

Thence  to  the  queen  :  "  O  partner  of  our  reign, 
O  sole  belov'd  !  command  thy  menial  train 
A  polish'd  chest  and  stately  robes  to  bear, 
And  healing  waters  for  the  bath  prepare: 
That,  bath'd,  our  guest  may  bid  his  sorrows  cease, 
Hear  the  sweet  song,  and  taste  the  feast  in  peace. 
A  bowl  that  flames  with  gold,  of  wondrous  frame, 
Ourself  we  give,  memorial  of  our  name; 
To  raise  in  offerings  to  almighty  Jove, 
And  every  god  that  treads  the  courts  above." 

Instant  the  queen,  observant  of  the  king, 
Commands  her  train  a  spacious  vase  to  bring ; 
The  spacious  vase  with  ample  streams  suffice, 
Heap  high  the  wood,  and  bid  the  flames  arise. 
The  flames  climb  round  it  with  a  fierce  embrace, 
The  fuming  waters  bubble  o'er  the  blaze. 
Herself  the  chest  prepares  :  in  order  roll'd 
The  robes,  the  vests  are  rang'd,  and  heaps  of  gold  : 
And  adding  a  rich  dress  inwrought  with  art, 
A  gift  expressive  of  her  bounteous  heart, 
Thus  spoke  to  Ithacus :  "  To  guard  with  bands 
Insolvable  these  gifts,  thy  care  demands; 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


149 


Lest,  in  thy  slumbers  on  the  wat'ry  main, 
The  hand  of  rapine  make  our  bounty  vain." 

Then  bending  with  full  force,  around  he  roll'd 
A  labyrinth  of  bands  in  fold  on  fold, 
Clos'd  with  Circaean  art.    A  train  attends 
Around  the  bath:  the  bath  the  king  ascends  : 
(Untasted  joy,  since  that  disastrous  hour 
He  sail'd,  ill-fated,  from  Calypso's  bow'r, 
Where,  happy  as  the  gods  that  range  the  sky, 
He  feasted  every  sense,  with  every  joy) 
He  bathes  ;  the  damsels  with  officious  toil 
Shed  sweets,  shed  unguents,  in  a  shower  of  oil : 
Then  o'er  his  limbs  a  gorgeous  robe  he  spreads, 
And  to  the  feast  magnificently  treads. 
Full  where  the  dome  its  shining  valves  expands, 
Nausicaa  blooming  as  a  goddess  stands, 
With  wondering  eyes  the  hero  she  survey'd, 
And  graceful  thus  began  the  royal  maid : 

"  Hail,  godlike  stranger !  and  when  heaven  restores 
To  thy  fond  wish  thy  long-expected  shores, 
This,  ever-grateful,  in  remembrance  bear, 
To  me  thou  ow'st,  to  me,  the  vital  air." 

"  O  royal  maid,  (Ulysses  straight  returns) 
Whose  worth  the  splendours  of  thy  race  adorns, 
So  may  dread  Jove,  whose  arm  in  vengeance  forms 
The  writhen  bolt,  and  blackens  heaven  with  storms, 
Restore  me  safe,  through  weary  wanderings  tost, 
To  my  dear  country's  ever-pleasing  coast, 
As  while  the  spirit  in  this  bosom  glows, 
To  thee,  my  goddess,  1  address  my  vows : 
My  life,  thy  gift  I  boast !"    He  said  and  sat, 
Fast  by  Alcinous,  on  a  throne  of  state. 
Now  each  partakes  the  feast,  the  wine  prepares, 
Portions  the  food,  and  each  his  portion  shares. 
The  bard  an  herald  guides :  the  gazing  throng 
Pay  low  obeisance  as  he  moves  along : 


150 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


Beneath  a  sculptur'd  arch  he  sits  enthron'd, 
The  peers  encircling  form  an  awful  round. 
Then  from  the  chine,  Ulysses  carves  with  art, 
Delicious  food,  an  honorary  part ; 
"  This,  let  the  master  of  the  lyre  receive, 
A  pledge  of  love!  'tis  all  a  wretch  can  give. 
Lives  there  a  man  beneath  the  spacious  skies, 
Who  sacred  honours  to  the  bard  denies  1 
The  Muse  the  bard  inspires,  exalts  his  mind ; 
The  Muse  indulgent  loves  th'  harmonious  kind.'' 

The  herald  to  his  hand  the  charge  conveys, 
Not  fond  of  flattery,  nor  un pleas' d  with  praise. 

When  now  the  rage  of  hunger  was  allay'd, 
Thus  to  the  lyrist  wise  Ulysses  said : 
"  O  more  than  man!  thy  soul  the  muse  inspires, 
Or  Phcebus  animates  with  all  his  fires : 
For  who,  by  Phoebus  uninform'd,  could  know 
The  wo  of  Greece,  and  sing  so  well  the  wo  1 
Just  to  the  tale,  as  present  at  the  fray, 
Or  taught  the  labours  of  the  dreadful  day  ! 
The  song  recalls  past  horrors  to  my  eyes, 
And  bids  proud  llion  from  her  ashes  rise. 
Once  more  harmonious  strike  the  sounding  string, 
Th'  Epaean  fabric,  fram'd  by  Pallas,  sing : 
How  stern  Ulysses,  furious  to  destroy, 
With  latent  heroes  sack'd  imperial  Troy. 
If  faithful  thou  record  the  tale  of  fame, 
The  god  himself  inspires  thy  breast  with  flame  : 
And  mine  shall  be  the  task,  henceforth,  to  raise 
In  every  land  thy  monument  of  praise." 
Full  of  the  god  he  rais'd  his  lofty  strain, 
How  the  Greeks  rush'd  tumultuous  to  the  main : 
How  blazing  tents  illumin'd  half  the  skies; 
While  from  the  shores  the  winged  navy  flies : 
How  e'en  in  Ilion's  walls,  in  deathful  bands, 
Came  the  stern  Greeks  by  Troy's  assisting  hands : 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


151 


All  Troy  up-heav'd  the  steed ;  of  different  mind, 
Various  the  Trojans  counsell'd ;  part  consign'd 
The  monster  to  the  sword,  part  sentence  gave 
To  plunge  it  headlong  in  the  whelming  wave  j 
Th'  unwise  award  to  lodge  it  in  the  towers, 
An  offering  sacred  to  th'  immortal  powers : 
Th'  unwise  prevail,  they  lodge  it  in  the  walls, 
And  by  the  gods'  decree  proud  llion  falls ; 
Destruction  enters  in  the  treacherous  wood, 
And  vengeful  slaughter,  fierce  for  human  blood. 

He  sung  the  Greeks  stern-issuing  from  the  steed, 
How  llion  burns,  how  all  her  fathers  bleed : 
How  to  thy  dome,  Deiphobus !  ascends 
The  Spartan  king ;  how  Ithacus  attends, 
(Horrid  as  Mars)  and  how  with  dire  alarms 
He  fights,  subdues  ;  for  Pallas  strings  his  arms. 

Thus  while  he  sung,  Ulysses'  griefs  renew, 
Tears  bathe  his  cheeks,  and  tears  the  ground  bedew. 
As  some  fond  matron  views  in  mortal  fight 
Her  husband  falling  in  his  country's  right : 
Frantic  through  clashing  swords  she  runs,  she  flies, 
As  ghastly  pale  he  groans,  and  faints,  and  dies : 
Close  to  his  breast  she  grovels  on  the  ground, 
And  bathes  with  floods  of  tears  the  gaping  wound ; 
She  cries,  she  shrieks  ;  the  fierce  insulting  foe 
Relentless  mocks  her  violence  of  wo : 
To  chains  condemn'd,  as  wildly  she  deplores ; 
A  widow,  and  a  slave  on  foreign  shores. 

So  from  the  sluices  of  Ulysses'  eyes 
Fast  fell  the  tears,  and  sighs  succeeded  sighs : 
Conceal'd  he  griev'd :  the  king  observ'd  alone 
The  silent  tear,  and  heard  the  secret  groan  : 
Then  to  the  bard  aloud:  "  O  cease  to  sing, 
Dumb  be  thy  voice,  and  mute  the  tuneful  string: 
To  every  note  his  tears  responsive  flow, 
And  his  great  heart  heaves  with  tumultuous  wo ; 


152 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  8. 


Thy  lay  too  deeply  moves :  then  cease  the  lay, 
And  o'er  the  banquet  every  heart  be  gay : 
This  social  right  demands  :  for  him  the  sails, 
Floating  in  air,  invite  th'  impelling  gales  : 
His  are  the  gilts  of  love  :  the  wise  and  good 
Receive  the  stranger  as  a  brother's  blood. 

"  But,  friend,  discover  faithful  what  I  crave, 
Artful  concealment  ill  becomes  the  brave : 
Say  what  thy  birth,  and  what  the  name  you  borea 
Impos'd  by  parents  in  the  natal  hour'? 
(For  from  the  natal  hour  distinctive  names, 
One  common  right,  the  great  and  lowly  claims) 
Say  from  what  city,  from  what  regions  tost, 
And  what  inhabitants  those  regions  boast  1 
So  shalt  thou  instant  reach  the  realm  assign'd, 
In  wondrous  ships  self-mov'd,  instinct  with  mind  ; 
No  helm  secures  their  course,  no  pilot  guides ; 
Like  man  intelligent,  they  plough  the  tides, 
Conscious  of  every  coast  and  every  bay, 
That  lies  beneath  the  sun's  all-seeing  ray  : 
Though  clouds  and  darkness  veil  th*  encumber'd  sky, 
Fearless  through  darkness  and  through  clouds  they  fly  ; 
Though  tempests  rage,  though  rolls  the  swelling  main, 
The  seas  may  roll,  the  tempests  rage  in  vain  ; 
E'en  the  stern  god  that  o'er  the  waves  presides, 
Safe  as  they  pass,  and  safe  repass  the  tides, 
With  fury  burns  ;  while  careless  they  convey 
Promiscuous  every  guest  to  every  bay. 
These  ears  have  heard  my  royal  sire  disclose 
A  dreadful  story  big  witii  future  woes : 
How  Neptune  rag'd,  and  how,  by  his  command, 
Firm  rooted  in  a  surge  a  ship  should  stand 
A  monument  of  wrath  :  how  mound  on  mound 
Should  bury  these  proud  towers  beneath  the  ground* 
But  this  the  gods  may  frustrate  or  fulfil, 
As  suits  the  purpose  of  th'  eternal  will. 


Book  8. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


153 


But  say  through  what  waste  regions  hast  thou  stray 'd, 

What  customs  noted,  and  what  coasts  survey'd? 

Possess'd  by  wild  barbarians  fierce  in  arms, 

Or  men,  whose  bosom  tender  pity  warms  1 

Say  why  the  fate  of  Troy  awak'd  thy  cares, 

Why  heav'd  thy  bosom,  and  why  flow'd  thy  tears? 

Just  are  the  ways  of  heaven  :  from  heaven  proceed 

The  woes  of  man  ;  heav'n  doom'd  the  Greeks  to  bleed, 

A  theme  of  future  song  !  Say  then  if  slain 

Some  dear  lov'd  brother  press'd  the  Phrygian  plain  % 

Or  bled  some  friend,  who  bore  a  brother's  part, 

And  claim'd  by  merit,  not  by  blood,  the  heart  ? 


BOOK  IX. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE    ADVENTURES    OF    THE    CICONS,    LOTOPHAGI,  AND 
CYCLOPS. 

ULYSSES  begins  the  relation  of  his  adventures  ;  how,  after  the 
destruction  of  Troy,  he  with  his  companions  made  an  incursion 
on  the  Cicons,  by  whom  they  were  repulsed;  and  meeting  with 
a  storm,  were  driven  to  the  coast  of  the  Lotophagi.  From  thence 
they  sailed  to  the  land  of  the  Cyclops,  whose  manners  and  si- 
tuation are  particularly  characterized.  The  giant  Polyphe- 
mus and  his  cave  described;  the  usage  Ulysses  and  his  compa- 
nions met  with  there ;  and,  lastly,  the  method  and  artifice  by 
which  he  escaped. 

Then  thus  Ulysses : — tc  Thou,  whom  first  in  sway, 

As  first  in  virtue,  these  thy  realms  obey ; 

How  sweet  the  products  of  a  peaceful  reign  ! 

The  heaven-taught  poet,  and  enchanting  strain ; 

The  well-fill'd  palace,  the  perpetual  feast, 

A  land  rejoicing,  and  a  people  bless'd  ! 

How  goodly  seems  it,  ever  to  employ 

Man's  social  days  in  union  and  in  joy ; 

The  plenteous  board  high-heap'd  with  cates  divine, 

And  o'er  the  foaming  bowl  the  laughing  wine ! 


156 


THE    OD  ySSEY. 


Book  9. 


"  Amid  these  joys,  why  seek  thy  mind  to  know 
The  unhappy  series  of  a  wanderer's  wo  ; 
Remembrance  sad,  whose  image  to  review, 
Alas  !  must  open  all  my  wounds  anew  1 
And  oh,  what,  first,  what  last  shall  I  relate, 
Of  woes  unnumber'd  sent  by  heaven  and  fate  1 

"Know  first  the  man  (though  now  a  wretch  dis- 
tress'd) 

Who  hopes  thee,  monarch,  for  his  future  guest: 

Behold  Ulysses !  no  ignoble  name, 

Earth  sounds  my  wisdom,  and  high  heaven  my  fame. 

"  My  native  soil  is  Ithaca  the  fair, 
Where  high  Ncritus  waves  his  woods  in  air : 
Dulichium,  Same,  and  Zacynthus  crown'd 
With  shady  mountains,  spread  their  isles  around. 
(These  to  the  north  and  night's  dark  regions  run, 
Those  to  Aurora  and  the  rising  sun.) 
Low  lies  our  isle,  yet  bless'd  in  fruitful  stores ; 
Strong  are  her  sons,  though  rocky  are  her  shores; 
And  none,  ah  none  so  lovely  to  my  sight, 
Of  all  the  lands  that  heaven  o'erspreads  with  light ! 
In  vain  Calypso  long  constraint  my  stay, 
With  sweet,  reluctant,  amorous  delay  ; 
With  all  her  charms  as  vainly  Circe  strove, 
And  added  magic,  to  secure  my  love. 
In  pomps  or  joys,  the  palace  or  the  grot, 
My  country's  image  never  was  forgot, 
My  absent  parents  rose  before  my  sight, 
And  distant  lay  contentment  and  delight. 

"  Hear  then  the  woes,  which  mighty  Jove  ordain'd 
To  wait  my  passage  from  the  Trojan  land. 
The  winds  from  liion  to  the  Cicon's  shore, 
Beneath  cold  Ismarus,  our  vessel  bore. 
We  boldly  landed  on  the  hostile  place, 
And  sack'd  the  city,  and  destroy 'd  the  race, 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


157 


Their  wives  made  captive,  their  possessions  shar'd, 

And  every  soldier  found  a  like  reward. 

I  then  advis'd  to  fly  ;  not  so  the  rest, 

Who  staid  to  revel,  and  prolong  the  feast : 

The  fatted  sheep  and  sable  bulls  they  slay, 

And  bowls  fly  round,  and  riot  wastes  the  day. 

Meantime  the  Cicons,  to  their  holds  retir'd, 

Call  on  the  Cicons,  with  new  fury  fir'd ; 

With  early  morn  the  gather'd  country  swarms, 

And  all  the  continent  is  bright  with  arms  ; 

Thick  as  the  budding  leaves  or  rising  flowers 

O'erspread  the  land,  when  spring  descends  in  showers  : 

All  expert  soldiers,  skill'd  on  foot  to  dare, 

Or  from  the  bounding  courser  urge  the  war. 

Now  fortune  changes  (so  the  fates  ordain,) 

Our  hour  was  come  to  taste  our  share  of  pain. 

Close  at  the  ships  the  bloody  fight  began, 

Wounded  they  wound,  and  man  expires  on  man. 

Long  as  the  morning  sun  increasing  bright 

O'er  heaven's  pure  azure  spread  the  growing  light, 

Promiscuous  death  the  form  of  war  confounds, 

Each  adverse  battle  gor'd  with  equal  wounds : 

But  when  his  evening  wheels  o'erhung  the  main, 

Then  conquest  crown'd  the  fierce  Ciconian  train. 

Six  brave  companions  from  each  ship  we  lost, 

The  rest  escaped  in  haste,  and  quit  the  coast. 

With  sails  outspread  we  fly  the  unequal  strife, 

Sad  for  their  loss,  but  joyful  of  our  life. 

Yet  as  we  fled,  our  fellow's  rites  we  paid, 

And  thrice  we  call'd  on  each  unhappy  shade. 

"  Meanwhile  the  god,  whose  hand  the  thunder  forms, 
Drives  clouds  on  clouds,  and  blackens  heaven  with 
storms  : 

Wide  o'er  the  waste  the  rage  of  Boreas  sweeps, 
And  night  rush'd  headlong  on  the  shaded  deeps. 


158 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


Now  here,  now  there,  the  giddy  ships  are  borne, 
And  all  the  rattling  shrouds  in  fragments  torn. 
We  furl'd  the  sail,  we  plied  the  labouring  oar, 
Took  down  our  masts,  and  row'd  our  ships  to  shore. 
Two  tedious  days  and  two  long  nights  we  lay, 
O'ervvatch'd  and  batter'd  in  the  naked  bay. 
But  the  third  morning  when  Aurora  brings, 
We  rear  the  masts,  we  spread  the  canvass  wings  ; 
Refresh'd,  and  careless  on  the  deck  reclin'd, 
We  sit  and  trust  the  pilot  and  the  wind. 
Then  to  my  native  country  had  I  sail'd ; 
But,  the  cape  doubled,  adverse  winds  prevail'd. 
Strong  was  the  tide,  which  by  the  northern  blast 
Impell'd,  our  vessels  on  Cythera  cast. 
Nine  days  our  fleet  th'  uncertain  tempest  bore 
Far  in  wide  ocean,  and  from  sight  of  shore  : 
The  tenth  we  touch'd,  by  various  errors  tost, 
The  land  of  Lotos,  and  the  flowery  coast. 
We  climb  the  beach,  and  springs  of  water  found, 
Then  spread  our  hasty  banquet  on  the  ground. 
Three  men  were  sent,  deputed  from  the  crew, 
(An  herald  one)  the  dubious  coast  to  view, 
And  learn  what  habitants  possess'd  the  place. 
They  went,  and  found  a  hospitable  race; 
Not  prone  to  ill,  nor  strange  to  foreign  guest, 
They  eat,  they  drink,  and  nature  gives  the  feast; 
The  trees  around  them,  all  their  fruit  produce; 
Lotos,  the  name ;  divine,  nectarious  juice ! 
(Thence  call'd  Lotophagi)  which  whoso  tastes, 
Insatiate  riots  in  the  sweet  repasts, 
Nor  other  home  nor  other  care  intends, 
But  quits  his  house,  his  country,  and  his  friends: 
The  three  we  sent,  from  off  thJ  enchanting  ground 
We  dragg'd  reluctant,  and  by  force  we  bound  : 
The  rest  in  haste  forsook  the  pleasing  shore, 
Or,  the  charm  tasted,  had  return'd  no  more. 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Now  plac'd  in  order  on  their  banks,  they  sweep 
The  sea's  smooth  face,  and  cleave  the  hoary  deep. 
With  heavy  hearts  we  labour  through  the  tide, 
To  coasts  unknown,  and  oceans  yet  untried. 

"  The  land  of  Cyclops  first ;  a  savage  kind, 
Nor  tamed  by  manners,  nor  by  laws  connn'd  : 
Untaught  to  plant,  to  turn  the  glebe  and  sow ; 
They  all  their  products  to  free  nature  owe. 
The  soil  untilPd  a  ready  harvest  yields, 
With  wheat  and  barley  wave  the  golden  fields, 
Spontaneous  wines  from  weighty  clusters  pour, 
And  Jove  descends  in  each  prolific  show'r. 
By  these  no  statutes  and  no  rights  are  known, 
No  council  held,  no  monarch  fills  the  throne  5 
But  high  on  hills  or  airy  cliffs  they  dwell, 
Or  deep  in  caves  whose  entrance  leads  to  hell. 
Each  rules  his  race,  his  neighbour  not  his  care, 
Heedless  of  others,  to  his  own  severe. 

"  Oppos'd  to  the  Cyclopean  coasts,  there  lay 
An  isle,  whose  hills  their  subject  fields  survey  ; 
Its  name  Lachaea,  crown'd  with  many  a  grove, 
Where  savage  goats  through  pathless  thickets  rove 
No  needy  mortals  here,  with  hunger  bold, 
Or  wretched  hunters,  through  the  wintry  cold, 
Pursue  their  flight ;  but  leave  them  safe  to  bound 
From  hill  to  hill,  o'er  all  the  desert  ground. 
Nor  knows  the  soil  to  feed  the  fleecy  care, 
Or  feels  the  labours  of  the  crooked  share  ; 
But  uninhabited,  untill'd,  unsown 
It  lies,  and  breeds  the  bleating  goat  alone. 
For  there  no  vessel  with  vermilion  prore, 
Or  bark  of  traffic,  glides  from  shore  to  shore ; 
The  rugged  race  of  savages,  unskill'd 
The  seas  to  traverse,  or  the  ships  to  build, 
Gaze  on  the  coast,  nor  cultivate  the  soil ; 
Unlearn'd  in  all  th*  industrious  arts  of  toil. 


160 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Yet  here  all  products  and  all  plants  abound, 
Sprung  from  the  fruitful  genius  of  the  ground  ; 
Fields  waving  high  with  heavy  crops  are  seen, 
And  vines  that  flourish  in  eternal  green, 
Refreshing  meads  along  the  murmuring  main, 
And  fountains  streaming  down  the  fruitful  plain. 

"  A  port  there  is,  enclos'd  on  either  side, 
Where  ships  may  rest,  unanchor'd  and  untied, 
Till  the  glad  mariners  incline  to  sail, 
And  the  sea  whitens  with  the  rising  gale. 
High  at  its  head,  from  out  the  cavern'd  rock, 
In  living  rills  a  gushing  fountain  broke : 
Around  it,  and  above,  for  ever  green 
The  bushing  alders  form'd  a  shady  scene. 
Hither  some  favouring  god,  beyond  our  thought, 
Through  all-surrounding  shade  our  navy  brought 
For  gloomy  night  descended  on  the  main, 
Nor  glimmer'd  Phoebe  in  th1  ethereal  plain  : 
But  all  unseen  the  clouded  island  lay, 
And  all  unseen  the  surge  and  rolling  sea, 
Till  safe  we  anchor'd  in  the  shelter'd  bay. 
Our  sails  we  gather'd,  cast  our  cables  o'er, 
And  slept,  secure  along  the  sandy  shore. 
Soon  as  again  the  rosy  morning  shone, 
Reveal'd  the  landscape  and  the  scene  unknown, 
With  wonder  seiz'd  we  view  the  pleasing  ground, 
And  walk  delighted,  and  expatiate  round. 
Rous'd  by  the  woodland  nymphs,  at  early  dawn, 
The  mountain  goats  came  bounding  o'er  the  lawn 
In  haste  our  fellows  to  the  ships  repair, 
For  arms  and  weapons  of  the  sylvan  war ; 
Straight  in  three  squadrons  all  our  crew  we  part, 
And  bend  the  bow,  or  wing  the  missile  dart : 
The  bounteous  gods  afford  a  copious  prey, 
And  nine  fat  goats  each  vessel  bears  away  ; 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


161 


The  royal  bark  had  ten.    Our  ships  complete 
We  thus  supplied  (for  twelve  were  all  the  fleet.) 

"  Here,  till  the  setting  sun  roll'd  down  the  light, 
We  sat  indulging  in  the  genial  rite  : 
Nor  wines  were  wanting  ;  those  from  ample  jars 
We  drain'd,  the  prize  of  our  Ciconian  wars. 
The  land  of  Cyclops  lay  in  prospect  near  ;  } 
The  voice  of  goats  and  bleating  flocks  we  hear,  > 
And  from  their  mountains  rising  smokes  appear.  } 
Now  sunk  the  sun,  and  darkness  cover'd  o'er 
The  face  of  things :  along  the  sea-beat  shore 
Satiate  we  slept :  but  when  the  sacred  dawn, 
Arising,  glitter'd  o'er  the  dewy  lawn, 
I  cali'd  my  fellows,  and  these  words  address'd  : 
{  My  dear  associates,  here  indulge  your  rest ; 
While  with  my  single  ship,  adventurous,  I 
Go  forth,  the  manners  of  yon  men  to  try  ; 
Whether  a  race  unjust,  of  barbarous  might, 
Rude,  and  unconscious  of  a  stranger's  right; 
Or  such  who  harbour  pity  in  their  breast, 
Revere  the  gods,  and  succour  the  distress'd.' 

"  This  said,  I  climb  my  vessel's  lofty  side ; 
My  train  obey'd  me,  and  the  ship  untied. 
In  order  seated  on  their  banks,  they  sweep 
Neptune's  smooth  face,  and  cleave  the  yielding  deep. 
When  to  the  nearest  verge  of  land  we  drew, 
Fast  by  the  sea  a  lonely  cave  we  view, 
High,  and  with  darkening  laurels  cover'd  o'er ; 
Where  sheep  and  goats  lay  slumbering  round  the  shore. 
Near  this,  a  fence  of  marble  from  the  rock, 
Brown  with  o'er-arching  pine,  and  spreading  oak. 
A  giant-shepherd  here  his  flock  maintains 
Far  from  the  rest,  and  solitary  reigns, 
In  shelter  thick  of  horrid  shade  reclin'd  ; 
And  gloomy  mischiefs  labour  in  his  mind. 

Is 


162 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


A  form  enormous !  far  unlike  the  race 
Of  human  birth,  in  stature,  or  in  face ; 
As  some  lone  mountain's  monstrous  growth  he  stood, 
Crown'd  with  rough  thickets,  and  a  nodding  wood. 
1  left  my  vessel  at  the  point  of  land, 
And  close  to  guard  it,  gave  our  crew  command: 
With  only  twelve,  the  boldest  and  the  best, 
I  seek  th*  adventure,  and  forsake  the  rest. 
Then  took  a  goatskin  fill'd  with  precious  wine, 
The  gift  of  Maron  of  Evantheus'  line 
(The  priest  of  Phoebus  at  th'  Ismarian  shrine.) 
In  sacred  shade  his  honour'd  mansion  stood 
Amidst  Apollo's  consecrated  wood  ; 
Him,  and  his  house,  heaven  mov'd  my  mind  to  save, 
And  costly  presents  in  return  he  gave ; 
Seven  golden  talents  to  perfection  wrought, 
A  silver  bowl  that  held  a  copious  draught, 
And  twelve  large  vessels  of  unmingled  wine, 
Mellifluous,  undecaying,  and  divine  ! 
Which  now  some  ages  from  his  race  conceal'd, 
The  hoary  sire  in  gratitude  reveal'd  : 
Such  was  the  wine;  to  quench  whose  fervent  steam, 
Scarce  twenty  measures  from  the  living  stream 
To  cool  one  cup  suffic'd :  the  goblet  crown'd 
Breathed  aromatic  fragrancies  around. 
Of  this  an  ample  vase  we  heav'd  aboard, 
And  brought  another  with  provisions  stor'd. 
My  soul  foreboded  I  should  find  the  bower 
Of  some  fell  monster,  fierce  with  barbarous  power, 
Some  rustic  wretch  who  liv'd  in  heaven's  despite, 
Contemning  laws,  and  trampling  on  the  right. 
The  cave  we  found,  but  vacant  all  within 
(His  flock  the  giant  tended  on  the  green  ;) 
But  round  the  grot  we  gaze;  and  all  we  view, 
In  order  rang'd,  our  admiration  drew : 


Book  0. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


103 


The  bending  shelves  with  loads  of  cheeses  press'd, 
The  folded  flocks  each  separate  from  the  rest. 
(The  larger  here,  and  there  the  lesser  lambs, 
The  new-fall'n  young  here  bleating  for  their  dams; 
The  kid  distinguish'd  from  the  lambkin  lies  :) 
The  cavern  echoes  with  responsive  cries. 
Capacious  chargers  all  around  were  laid, 
Full  pails,  and  vessels  of  the  milking  trade. 
"With  fresh  provisions  hence  our  fleet  to  store 
My  friends  advise  me,  and  to  quit  the  shore; 
Or  drive  a  flock  of  sheep  and  goats  away. 
Consult  our  safety,  and  put  off  to  sea. 
Their  wholesome  counsel  rashly  I  declin'd, 
Curious  to  view  the  man  of  monstrous  kind, 
And  try  what  social  rites  a  savage  lends: 
Dire  rites,  alas  !  and  fatal  to  my  friends ! 

"  Then  first  a  fire  we  kindle,  and  prepare 
For  his  return  with  sacrifice  and  pray'r. 
The  loaden  shelves  afford  us  full  repast; 
We  sit  expecting.    Lo  !  he  comes  at  last. 
JNear  half  a  forest  on  his  back  he  bore, 
And  cast  the  pond'rous  burden  at  the  door. 
It  thunder'd  as  it  fell.    We  trembled  then, 
And  sought  the  deep  recesses  of  the  den. 
Now  driven  before  him,  through  the  arching  rock, 
Came  tumbling,  heaps  on  heaps,  th'  unnumber'd  flock; 
Big-udder'd  ewes,  and  goats  of  female  kind 
(The  males  were  penn'd  in  outward  courts  behind.) 
Then,  heav'd  on  high,  a  rock's  enormous  weight 
To  the  cave's  mouth  he  roll'd,  and  clos'd  the  gate. 
(Scarce  twenty  four-wheel'd  cars,  compact  and  strong, 
The  massy  load  could  bear,  or  roll  along.) 
He  next  betakes  him  to  his  evening  cares, 
And,  sitting  down,  to  milk  his  flocks  prepares  ; 
Of  half  their  udders,  eases  first  the  dams, 
Then  to  the  mother's  teat  submits  the  lambs. 


164 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


Half  the  white  stream  to  hardening  cheese  he  press'd,  ) 
And  high  in  wicker  baskets  heap'd  :  the  rest,  > 
Reserv'd  in  bowls,  supplied  the  nightly  feast.  } 
His  labour  done,  he  fir'd  the  pile  that  gave 
A  sudden  blaze,  and  lighted  all  the  cave. 
We  stand  discover'd  by  the  rising  fires ; 
Askance  the  giant  glares,  and  thus  inquires : 

'  What  are  ye,  guests ;  on  what  adventure  say, 
Thus  far  ye  wander  through  the  watery  way  1 
Pirates,  perhaps,  who  seek  through  seas  unknown 
The  lives  of  others,  and  expose  your  own.' 

"  His  voice  like  thunder  through  the  cavern  sounds: 
My  bold  companions  thrilling  fear  confounds, 
Appall'd  at  sight  of  more  than  mortal  man  ! 
At  length,  with  heart  recover'd,  I  began : 

"  From  Troy's  fam'd  fields,  sad  wanderers  o'er  the 
main, 

Behold  the  relics  of  the  Grecian  train  ! 
Through  various  seas  by  various  perils  toss'd, 
And  forc'd  by  storms  unwilling,  on  your  coast ; 
Far  from  our  destin'd  course,  and  native  land, 
Such  was  our  fate,  and  such  high  Jove's  command  ! 
Nor  what  we  are  befits  us  to  disclaim, 
Atrides'  friends,  (in  arms  a  mighty  name,) 
Who  taught  proud  Troy  and  all  her  sons  to  bow ; 
Victors  of  late,  but  humble  suppliants  now  ! 
Low  at  thy  knee  thy  succour  we  implore  ; 
Respect  us,  human :  and  relieve  us,  poor. 
At  least  some  hospitable  gift  bestow ; 
'Tis  what  the  happy  to  th'  unhappy  owe  : 
'Tis  what  the  gods  require  :  those  gods  revere, 
The  poor  and  stranger  are  their  constant  care  ; 
To  Jove  their  cause  and  their  revenge  belongs, 
He  wanders  with  them,  and  he  feels  their  wrongs." 

1  Fools  that  ye  are  !  (the  savage  thus  replies, 
His  inward  fury  blazing  at  his  eyes) 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Or  strangers,  distant  far  from  our  abodes, 

To  bid  me  reverence  or  regard  the  gods. 

Know  then  we  Cyclops  are  a  race,  above 

Those  air-bred  people,  and  their  goat-nurs'd  Jove : 

And  learn,  our  power  proceeds  with  thee  and  thine, 

Not  as  he  wills,  but  as  ourselves  incline. 

But  answer,  the  good  ship  that  brought  ye  o'er, 

Where  lies  she  anchor'd  1  near  or  off  the  shore  V 

"  Thus  he.    His  meditated  fraud  I  find, 
(Vers'd  in  the  turns  of  various  humankind) 
And,  cautious,  thus :  '  Against  a  dreadful  rock, 
Fast  by  your  shore  the  gallant  vessel  broke  : 
Scarce  with  these  few  I  'scaped  :  of  all  my  train,  1 
Whom  angry  Neptune  whelm'd  beneath  the  main;  > 
The  scatter'd  wreck  the  winds  blew  back  again.'  J 

"He  answer'd  with  his  deed.    His  bloody  hand 
Snatch'd  two,  unhappy  !  of  my  martial  band, 
And  dash'd  like  dogs  against  the  stony  floor  : 
The  pavement  swims  with  brains  and  mingled  gore. 
Torn  limb  from  limb,  he  spreads  his  horrid  feast, 
And  fierce  devours  it  like  a  mountain  beast  : 
He  sucks  the  marrow,  and  the  blood  he  drains, 
Nor  entrails,  flesh,  nor  solid  bone  remains. 
We  see  that  death  from  which  we  cannot  move, 
And  humbled  groan  beneath  the  hand  of  Jove. 
His  ample  maw  with  human  carnage  fill'd, 
A  milky  deluge  next  the  giant  swill'd  ; 
Then  stretch'd  in  length  o'er  half  the  cavern'd  rock 
Lay  senseless,  and  supine,  amidst  the  flock. 
To  seize  the  time,  and  with  a  sudden  wound 
To  fix  the  slumbering  monster  to  the  ground, 
My  soul  impels  me  ;  and  in  act  I  stand 
To  draw  the  sword  ;  but  wisdom  held  my  hand, 
A  deed  so  rash  had  finish'd  all  our  fate ; 
No  mortal  forces  from  the  lofty  gate 


166 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


Could  roll  the  rock.    In  hopeless  grief  we  lay, 
And  sigh,  expecting  the  return  of  day. 

"  Now  did  the  rosy  finger'd  morn  arise, 
And  shed  her  sacred  light  along  the  skies. 
He  wakes,  he  lights  the  fire,  he  milks  the  dams, 
And  to  the  mother's  teats  submits  the  lambs. 
The  task  thus  finish'd  of  his  morning  hours, 
Two  more  he  snatches,  murders,  and  devours. 
Then,  pleas' d  and  whistling,  drives  his  flock  before; 
Removes  the  rocky  mountain  from  the  door, 
And  shuts  again  :  with  equal  ease  dispos'd, 
As  a  light  quiver's  lid  is  op'd  and  clos'd. 
His  giant  voice  the  echoing  region  fills : 
His  flocks,  obedient,  spread  o'er  all  the  hills. 

"  Thus  left  behind,  e'en  in  the  last  despair, 
I  thought,  devis'd,  and  Pallas  heard  my  pray'r. 
Revenge,  and  doubt,  and  caution  work'd  my  breast  : 
But  this  of  many  counsels  seem'd  the  best : 
The  monster's  club,  within  the  cave  I  spied, 
A  tree  of  stately  growth,  and  yet  undried, 
Green  from  the  wood ;  of  height  and  bulk  so  vast, 
The  largest  ship  might  claim  it  for  a  mast. 
This,  shorten'd  of  its  top,  I  gave  my  train 
A  fathom's  length,  to  shape  it  and  to  plane ; 
The  narrower  end  I  sharpen 'd  to  a  spire  ; 
Whose  point  we  harden'd  with  the  force  of  fire, 
And  hid  it  in  the  dust  that  strow'd  the  cave. 
Then  to  my  few  companions,  bold  and  brave, 
Propos'd  who  first  the  venturous  deed  should  try, 
In  the  broad  orbit  of  his  monstrous  eye 
To  plunge  the  brand,  and  twirl  the  pointed  wood, 
When  slumber  next  should  tame  the  man  of  blood. 
Just  as  I  wish'd,  the  lots  were  cast  on  four : 
Myself  the  fifth.    We  stand  and  wait  the  hour. 
He  comes  with  evening  :  all  his  fleecy  flock 
Before  him  march,  and  pour  into  the  rock ; 


Book  9. 


T  II  E  ODYSSEY. 


167 


Not  one,  or  male  or  female,  stay  VI  behind  : 
(So  fortune  chanc'd,  or  so  some  god  design'd) 
Then  heaving  high  the  stone's  unwieldy  weight, 
He  roll'd  it  on  the  cave,  and  clos'd  the  gate. 
First  down  he  sits,  to  milk  the  woolly  dams, 
And  then  permits  their  udder  to  the  lambs. 
Next  seiz'd  two  wretches  more,  and  headlong  cast, 
Brain'd  on  the  rock;  his  second  dire  repast. 
I  then  approach'd  him  reeking  with  their  gore, 
And  held  the  brimming  goblet  foaming  o'er : 
1  Cyclop  !  since  human  flesh  has  been  thy  feast, 
Now  drain  this  goblet  potent  to  digest: 
Know  hence  what  treasures  in  our  ship  we  lost, 
And  what  rich  liquors  other  climates  boast. 
We  to  thy  shore  the  precious  freight  shall  bear, 
If  home  thou  send  us,  and  vouchsafe  to  spare. 
But  oh!  thus  furious,  thirsting  thus  for  gore,  } 
The  sons  of  men  shall  ne'er  approach  thy  shore,  > 
And  never  shalt  thou  taste  this  nectar  more.'  ) 

"  He  heard,  he  took,  and  pouring  down  his  throat 
Delighted,  swill'd  the  large  luxurious  draught. 
1  More  !  give  me  more  !  (he  cried)  the  boon  be  thine, 
Whoe'er  thou  art,  that  bear'st  celestial  wine  ! 
Declare  thy  name  ;  not  mortal  is  this  juice, 
Such  as  th'  unbless'd  Cyclopean  climes  produce, 
(Though  sure  our  vine  the  largest  cluster  yields, 
And  Jove's  scorn'd  thunder  serves  to  drench  our  fields) 
But  this  descended  from  the  blest  abodes, 
A  rill  of  nectar  streaming  from  the  gods.' 

"  He  said,  and  greedy,  grasp'd  the  heady  bowl, 
Thrice  drain'd,  and  pour'd  the  deluge  on  his  soul. 
His  sense  lay  cover'd  with  the  dozy  fume  ; 
While  thus  my  fraudful  speech  I  reassume  • 
'  Thy  promis'd  boon,  O  Cyclop !  now  I  claim, 
And  plead  my  title  :  Noman  is  my  name. 


168 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


By  that  distinguish'd  from  my  tender  years, 
'Tis  what  my  parents  call  me,  and  my  peers.' 

11  The  giant  then  :  \  Our  promis'd  grace  receive, 
The  hospitable  boon  we  mean  to  give : 
"When  all  thy  wretched  crew  have  felt  my  pow'r, 
Noman  shall  be  the  last  I  will  devour.' 

"He  said  :  then  nodding  with  the  fumes  of  wine 
Dropp'd  his  huge  head,  and  snoring  lay  supine. 
His  neck  obliquely  o'er  his  shoulders  hung, 
Press'd  with  the  weight  of  sleep  that  tames  the  strong ! 
There  belch'd  the  mingled  steams  of  wine  and  blood, 
And  human  flesh,  his  indigested  food. 
Sudden  I  stir  the  embers,  and  inspire 
With  animating  breath  the  seeds  of  fire; 
Each  drooping  spirit  with  bold  words  repair, 
And  urge  my  train  the  dreadful  deed  to  dare. 
The  stake  now  glow'd  beneath  the  burning  bed 
(Green  as  it  was)  and  sparkled  fiery  red. 
Then  forth  the  vengeful  instrument  I  bring; 
With  beating  hearts  my  fellows  form  a  ring. 
Urg'd  by  some  present  god,  they  swift  let  fall 
The  pointed  torment  on  his  visual  ball. 
Myself  above  them  from  a  rising  ground 
Guide  the  sharp  stake  and  twirl  it  round  and  round. 
As  when  a  shipright  stands  his  workmen  o'er, 
Who  ply  the  wimble,  some  huge  beam  to  bore ; 
Urg'd  on  all  hands  it  nimbly  spins  about, 
The  grain  deep  piercing  till  it  scoops  it  out: 
In  his  broad  eye  so  whirls  the  fiery  wood  ; 
From  the  pierc'd  pupil  spouts  the  boiling  blood  ; 
Sing'd  are  his  brows  ;  the  scorching  lids  grow  black  ; 
The  jelly  bubbles,  and  the  fibres  crack. 
And  as  when  armourers  temper  in  the  ford 
The  keen  edg'd  poleaxe,  or  the  shining  sword, 
The  red-hot  metal  hisses  in  the  lake  : 
Thus  in  his  eyeball  hiss'd  the  plunging  stake. 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


1G9 


He  sends  a  dreadful  groan  :  the  rocks  around 
Through  all  their  inmost  winding  caves  resound. 
Scar'd  we  receded.    Forth,  with  frantic  hand, 
He  tore  and  dash'd  on  earth  the  gory  brand. 
Then  calls  the  Cyclops,  all  that  round  him  dwell, 
"With  voice  like  thunder,  and  a  direful  yell. 
From  all  their  dens  the  one-eyed  race  repair, 
From  rifted  rocks,  and  mountains  bleak  in  air. 
All  haste  assembled,  at  his  well-known  roar, 
Inquire  the  cause,  and  crowd  the  cavern  door. 

4  What  hurts  thee,  Polypheme  1  what  strange  af- 
fright 

Thus  breaks  ©ur  slumbers,  and  disturbs  the  night  1 
Does  any  mortal  in  th'  unguarded  hour 
Of  sleep  oppress  thee,  or  by  fraud  or  pow'r  1 
Or  thieves  insiduous  the  fair  flock  surprise  V 
Thus  they.    The  Cyclop  from  his  den  replies: 

1  Friends,  Noman  kills  me  ;  Noman  in  the  hour 
Of  sleep  oppresses  me  with  fraudful  pow'r.' 
{ If  no  man  hurt  thee,  but  the  hand  divine 
Inflict  disease,  it  fits  thee  to  resign : 
To  jove  or  to  thy  father  Neptune  pray,' 
The  brethren  cried,  and  instant  strode  away. 

"Joy  touch'd  my  secret  soul  and  conscious  heart, 
Pleas'd  with  th'  effect  of  conduct  and  of  art. 
Meantime  the  Cyclop,  raging  with  his  wound, 
Spreads  his  wide  arms,  and  searches  round  and  round  : 
At  last  the  stone  removing  from  the  gate, 
"With  hands  extended  in  the  midst  he  sate; 
And  search'd  each  passing  sheep,  and  felt  it  o'er, 
Secure  to  seize  us  ere  we  reach'd  the  door. 
(Such  as  his  shallow  wit,  he  deem'd  was  mine) 
But  secret  I  revolv'd  the  deep  design  ; 
'Twas  for  our  lives  my  labouring  bosom  wrought; 
Each  scheme  I  turn'd,  and  sharpen'd  every  thought  j 


170 


THE    OD  YSSE  Y. 


Book 


This  way  and  that,  1  cast  my  friends, 
Till  one  resolve  my  varying  counsel  ends. 

"  Strong  were  the  rams,  with  native  purple  fair, 
Well  fed,  and  largest  of  the  fleecy  care. 
These  three  and  three,  with  osier  hands  we  tied  ; 
(The  twining  bands  the  Cyclop's  bed  supply'd) 
The  midmost  bore  a  man  ;  the  outward  two 
Secur'd  each  side :  so  bound  we  all  the  crew. 
One  ram  remain'd,  the  leader  of  the  flock  ; 
In  his  deep  fleece  my  grasping  hands  I  lock, 
And  fast  beneath,  in  woolly  curls  inwove, 
There  cling  implicit,  and  confide  in  Jove. 
When  rosy  morning  glimmer' d  o'er  the  dales, 
He  drove  to  pasture  all  the  lusty  males  : 
The  ewes  still  folded,  with  distended  thighs 
Unmilk'd,  lay  bleating  in  distressful  cries. 
But  heedless  of  those  cares,  with  anguish  stung, 
He  felt  their  fleeces  as  they  pass'd  along  : 
(Fool  that  he  was)  and  let  them  safely  go, 
All  unsuspecting  of  their  freight  below. 

"  The  master  ram  at  last  approach'd  the  gate, 
Charg'd  with  his  wool,  and  with  Ulysses'  fate. 
Him,  while  he  pass'd,  the  monster  blind  bespoke  : 
c  What  makes  my  ram  the  lag  of  all  the  flock  1 
First  thou  wert  wont  to  crop  the  flowery  mead, 
First  to  the  field  and  river's  bank  to  lead, 
And  first  with  stately  step  at  evening  hour 
Thy  fleecy  fellows  usher  to  their  bow'r. 
Now  far  the  last,  with  pensive  pace  and  slow 
Thou  mov'st,  as  conscious  of  thy  master's  wo  ! 
Seest  thou  these  lids  that  now  unfold  in  vain  1 
(The  deed  of  Noman  and  his  wicked  train) 
Oh  !  didst  thou  feel  for  thy  afflicted  lord, 
And  would  but  fate  the  power  of  speech  afford  ; 
Soon  might'st  thou  tell  me,  where  in  secret  here 
The  dastard  lurks,  all  trembling  with  his  fear  ; 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


171 


Swung  round  and  round,  and  dash'd  from  rock  to  rock, 
His  batter'd  brains  should  on  the  pavement  smoke. 
No  ease,  no  pleasure  my  sad  heart  receives, 
While  such  a  monster  as  vile  JNoman  lives.' 

"  The  giant  spoke,  and  through  the  hollow  rock 
Dismiss'd  the  ram,  the  father  of  the  flock. 
No  sooner  freed,  and  through  the  enclosure  past, 
First  I  release  myself,  my  fellows  last : 
Fat  sheep  and  goats  in  throngs  we  drive  before, 
And  reach  our  vessel  on  the  winding  shore. 
With  joy  the  sailors  view  their  friends  return'd, 
And  hail  us  living  whom  as  dead  they  mourn'd. 
Big  tears  of  transport  stand  in  every  eye  : 
1  check  their  fondness,  and  command  to  fly. 
Aboard  in  haste  they  heave  the  wealthy  sheep, 
And  snatch'd  their  oars,  and  rush  into  the  deep. 

"  Now  off  at  sea,  and  from  the  shallows  clear, 
As  far  as  human  voice  could  reach  the  ear  ; 
With  taunts  the  distant  giant  I  accost, 
'  Hear  me,  O  Cyclop !  hear,  ungracious  host ! 
'Twas  on  no  coward,  no  ignoble  slave, 
Thou  meditat'st  thy  meal  in  yonder  cave  ; 
But  one,  the  vengeance  fated  from  above 
Doom'd  to  inflict;  the  instrument  of  Jove. 
Thy  barbarous  breach  of  hospitable  bands, 
The  god,  the  god  revenges  by  my  hands.' 

"  These  words  the  Cyclop's  burning  rage  provoke: 
From  the  tall  hill  he  rends  a  pointed  rock ; 
High  o'er  the  billows  flew  the  massy  load, 
And  near  the  ship  came  thundering  on  the  flood. 
It  almost  brush'd  the  helm,  and  fell  before  : 
The  whole  sea  shook,  and  refluent  beat  the  shore. 
The  strong  concussion  on  the  heaving  tide 
Roll'd  back  the  vessel  to  the  island's  side  : 
Again  I  shov'd  her  off;  our  fate  to  fly, 
Each  nerve  we  stretch,  and  every  oar  we  ply. 


172 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


Just  'scap'd  impending  death,  when  now  again 
We  twice  as  far  had  furrow'd  back  the  main, 
Once  more  I  raise  my  voice ;  my  friends  afraid 
"With  mild  entreaties  my  design  dissuade : 
'  What  boots  the  godless  giant  to  provoke, 
Whose  arm  may  sink  us  at  a  single  stroke  1 
Already,  when  the  dreadful  rock  he  threw, 
Old  Ocean  shook,  and  back  his  surges  flew. 
The  sounding  voice  directs  his  aim  again  ; 
The  rock  o'erw helms  us,  and  we  'scap'd  in  vain.' 

"  But  I  of  mind  elate,  and  scorning  fear, 
Thus  with  new  taunts  insult  the  monsters  ear  : 
1  Cyclop !  if  any,  pitying  thy  disgrace ; 
Ask  who  disfigured  thus  that  eyeless  face? 
Say  'twas  Ulysses ;  'twas  his  deed  declare, 
Laertes'  son  of  Ithaca  the  fair ; 
Ulysses,  far  in  fighting  fields  renown'd, 
Before  whose  arm  Troy  tumbled  to  the  ground.' 

"  Th'  astonish'd  savage  with  a  roar  replies; 
fO  heavens!  O  faith  of  ancient  prophecies  ! 
This,  Telemus  Eurymedes  foretold, 
(The  mighty  seer  who  on  these  hills  grew  old  ; 
Skill'd  the  dark  fates  of  mortals  to  declare, 
And  learn'd  in  all  wing'd  omens  of  the  air) 
Long  since  he  menac'd,  such  was  fate's  command ; 
And  nam'd  Ulysses  as  the  destin'd  hand. 
I  deem'd  some  godlike  giant  to  behold, 
Or  lofty  hero,  haughty,  brave,  and  bold ; 
Not  this  weak  pig  my- wretch,  of  mean  design, 
Who  not  by  strength  subdued  me,  but  by  wine. 
But  come,  accept  our  gifts,  and  join  to  pray 
Great  Neptune's  blessing  on  the  watery  way : 
For  his  I  am,  and  I  the  lineage  own  : 
Th'  immortal  father  no  less  boasts  the  son. 
His  power  can  heal  me,  and  re- light  my  eye : 
And  only  his,  of  all  the  gods  on  high.' 


Book  9. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


1  Oh  !  could  this  arm  (I  thus  aloud  rejoin'd) 
From  that  vast  bulk  dislodge  thy  bloody  mind, 
And  send  thee  howling  to  the  realms  of  night ! 
[As  sure,  as  Neptune  cannot  give  thee  sight.' 
[    "  Thus  I :  while  raging  he  repeats  his  cries, 
With  hands  uplifted  to  the  starry  skies  : 

1*  Hear  me,  O  Neptune  !  thou  whose  arms  are  hurl'd 

rFrom  shore  to  shore,  and  gird  the  solid  world. 
If  thine  I  am,  nor  thou  my  birth  disown, 
And  if  th'  unhappy  Cyclop  be  thy  son: 
Let  not  Ulysses  breathe  his  native  air, 
Laertes'  son,  of  Ithaca  the  fair. 
If  to  review  his  country  be  his  fate, 
Be  it  through  toils  and  sufferings,  long  and  late ; 
His  lost  companions  let  him  first  deplore : 
Some  vessel,  not  his  own,  transports  him  o'er  ; 

j'And  when  at  home  from  foreign  sufferings  freed, 
More  near  and  deep,  domestic  woes  succeed!' 
"  With  imprecations  thus  he  fill'd  the  air, 

J  And  angry  Neptune  heard  th'  unrighteous  prayer. 

-i  A  larger  rock  then  heaving  from  the  plain  ; 

I  He  whirl'd  it  round  :  it  sung  across  the  main  ; 

I  It  fell,  and  brush'd  the  stern  :  the  billows  roar, 
Shake  at  the  weight,  and  refluent  beat  the  shore. 
With  all  our  force  we  kept  aloof  to  sea, 

!  And  gain'd  the  island  where  our  vessels  lay. 

|  Our  sight  the  whole  collected  navy  cheer'd, 
Who,  waiting  long,  by  turns  had  hop'd  and  fear'd. 
There  disembarking  on  the  green  sea-side, 

'We  land  our  cattle,  and  the  spoil  divide  : 
Of  these  due  shares  to  every  sailor  fall ; 
The  master  ram  was  voted  mine  by  all ; 
And  him  (the  guardian  of  Ulysses'  fate) 
With  pious  mind  to  heaven  I  consecrate. 
But  the  great  god,  whose  thunder  rends  the  skies, 
Averse,  beholds  the  smoking  sacrifice  ; 


174 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  9. 


And  sees  me  wandering  still  from  coast  to  coast, 
And  all  my  vessels,  all  my  people  lost ! 

"  While  thoughtless  we  indulge  the  genial  rite. 
As  plenteous  cates  and  flowing  bowls  invite ; 
Till  evening  Phoebus  roll'd  away  the  light : 
Stretch'd  on  the  shore  in  careless  ease  we  rest, 
Till  ruddy  morning  purpled  o'er  the  east. 
Then  from  their  anchors  all  our  ships  unbind, 
And  mount  the  decks,  and  call  the  willing  wind. 
Now  rang'd  in  order  on  our  banks,  we  sweep 
With  hasty  strokes  the  hoarse-resounding  deep; 
Blind  to  the  future,  pensive  with  our  fears, 
Glad  for  the  living,  for  the  dead  in  tears." 


BOOK  X. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

ADVENTURES  WITH  ^OLUS,  THE  LCESTRIGONS,  AND 
CIRCE. 

ULYSSES  arrives  at  the  island  of  iEolus,  who  gives  him  pros- 
perous winds,  arid  incloses  the  adverse  ones  in  a  bag,  which  his 
companions  untying,  they  are  driven  back  again,  and  rejected. 
Then  they  sail  to  the  Laestrigons,  where  they  lose  eleven  ships, 
and,  with  one  only  remaining,  proceed  to  the  island  of  Circe. 
Eurylochus  is  sent  first  with  some  companions,  all  which, 
except  Eurylochus,  are  transformed  into  swine.  Ulysses  then 
undertakes  the  adventure,  and  by  the  help  ot  Mercury,  who 
gives  him  the  herb  Moly,  overcomes  the  enchantress,  and  pro- 
cures the  restoration  of  his  men.  After  a  year's  stay  with  her, 
he  prepares  at  her  instigation  for  his  voyage  to  the  infernal 
shades. 

r  At  length  we  reachM  iEolia's  sea-girt  shore, 
Where  great  Hippotades  the  sceptre  bore; 
A  floating  isle  !  high  rais'd  by  toil  divine, 
Strong  walls  of  brass  the  rocky  coast  confine. 
Six  blooming  youths,  in  private  grandeur  bred, 
And  six  fair  daughters,  grac'd  the  royal  bed  : 
These  sons  their  sisters  wed,  and  all  remain 
Their  parents'  pride,  and  pleasure  of  their  reign. 


176 


THE  ODYSSEY, 


Book  10. 


All  day  they  feast,  all  day  the  bowls  fly  round, 
And  joy  and  music  through  the  isle  resound  : 
At  night  each  pair  on  splendid  carpets  lay, 
And  crown'd  with  love  the  pleasures  of  the  day. 

"  This  happy  port  affords  our  wandering  fleet 
A  month's  reception,  and  a  safe  retreat. 
Full  oft  the  monarch  urg'd  me  to  relate 
The  fall  of  Ilion,  and  the  Grecian  fate  ; 
Full  oft  I  told  :  at  length  for  parting  mov'd ; 
The  king  with  mighty  gifts  my  suit  approv!d. 
The  adverse  winds  in  leathern  bags  he  brac'd, 
Compress'd  their  force,  and  lock'd  each  struggling  blast : 
For  him  the  mighty  sire  of  gods  assign'd 
The  tempest's  lord,  the  tyrant  of  the  wind  ; 
His  word  alone  the  listening  storms  obey, 
To  smooth  the  deep,  or  swell  the  foamy  sea. 
These  in  my  hollow  ship  the  monarch  hung, 
Securely  fetter' d  by  a  silver  thong; 
But  Zephyrus  exempt,  with  friendly  sales  } 
He  charg'd  to  fill,  and  guide  the  swelling  sails  :  > 
Rare  gilt !  but  oh,  what  gift  to  fools  avails  *\  ) 

"  Nine  prosperous  days  we  plied  the  labouring  oar  ; 
The  tenth  presents  our  welcome  native  shore: 
The  hills  display  the  beacon's  friendly  light, 
And  rising  mountains  gain  upon  our  sight. 
Then  first  my  eyes  by  watchful  toils  oppress'd, 
Complied  to  take  the  balmy  gifts  of  rest; 
Then  first  my  hands  did  from  the  rudder  part, 
(So  much  the  love  of  home  possess'd  my  heart) 
When  lo  !  on  board  a  fond  debate  arose  ; 
What  rare  device  those  vessels  might  enclose  % 
What  sum,  what  prize  from  iEolus  I  brought ! 
Whilst  to  his  neighbour  each  express'd  his  thought : 

'  Say,  whence,  ye  gods,  contending  nations  strive 
Who  most  shall  please,  who  most  our  hero  give  1 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


177 


Long  have  his  coffers  groan 'd  with  Trojan  spoils  ; 
Whilst  we,  the  wretched  partners  of  his  toils, 
Reproach'd  by  want,  our  fruitless  labours  mourn, 
And  only  rich  in  barren  fame  return. 
Now  iEolus,  ye  see,  augments  his  store  : 
But  come,  my  friends,  these  mystic  gifts  explore.' 
They  said:  and  (oh  curs'd  fate  !)  the  thongs  unbound  I 
The  gushing  tempest  sweeps  the  ocean  round  : 
Snatch'd  in  the  whirl,  the  hurried  navy  flew, 
The  ocean  widen'd,  and  the  shores  withdrew. 
Rous'd  from  my  fatal  sleep,  I  long  debate 
If  still  to  live,  or  desperate  plunge  to  fate: 
Thus  doubting,  prostrate  on  the  deck  I  lay, 
Till  all  the  coward  thoughts  of  death  gave  way. 

"  Meanwhile  our  vessels  plough  the  liquid  plain, 
And  soon  the  known  iEolian  coast  regain, 
Our  groans  the  rocks  remurmur'd  to  the  main. 
We  leap'd  on  shore,  and  with  a  scanty  feast 
Our  thirst  and  hunger  hastily  repress'd 
That  done,  two  chosen  heralds  straight  attend 
Our  second  progress  to  my  royal  friend  ; 
And  him  amidst  his  jovial  sons  we  found; 
The  banquet  streaming,  and  the  goblets  crown'd : 
There  humbly  stopp'd  with  conscious  shame  and  awe, 
Nor  nearer  than  the  gate  presum'd  to  draw. 
But  soon  his  sons  their  well-known  guest  descried, 
And  starting  from  their  couches  loudly  cried  : 
*  Ulysses  here !  what  daemon  couldst  thou  meet 
To  thwart  thy  passage  and  repel  thy  fleet  i 
Wast  thou  not  furnish'd  by  our  choicest  care 
For  Greece,  for  home,  and  all  thy  soul  held  dear  V 
Thus  they ;  in  silence  long  my  fate  I  mourn'd, 
At  length  these  words  with  accent  low  return'd  : 
'  Me,  lock'd  in  sleep,  my  faithless  crew  bereft 
Of  all  the  blessings  of  your  godlike  gift ! 
M 


178 


the  o o  y  sse  y. 


Book  10. 


But  grant,  O  grant  our  loss  we  may  retrieve : 
A  favour  you,  and  you  alone  can  give.' 

"  Thus  I  with  art  to  move  their  pity  tried, 
And  touch'd  the  youths ;  but  their  stern  sire  replied : 
1  Vile  wretch,  be  gone  !  this  instant  I  command 
Thy  fleet  accurs'd  to  leave  our  hallow'd  land. 
His  baneful  suit  pollutes  these  bless'd  abodes, 
Whose  fate  proclaims  him  hateful  to  the  gods.' 

u  Thus  fierce  he  said  :  we  sighing  went  our  way, 
And  with  desponding  hearts  put  off  to  sea. 
The  sailors  spent  with  toils  their  folly  mourn, 
But  mourn  in  vain  ;  no  prospect  of  return. 
Six  days  and  nights  a  doubtful  course  we  steer, 
The  next  proud  Lamos'  stately  towers  appear, 
And  Laestiigonia's  gates  arise  distinct  in  air. 
The  shepherd  quitting  here  at  night  the  plain, 
Calls,  to  succeed  his  cares,  the  watchful  swain : 
But  he  that  scorns  the  chains  of  sleep  to  wear, 
And  adds  the  herdsman's  to  the  shepherd's  care, 
So  near  the  pastures,  and  so  short  the  way, 
His  double  toils  may  claim  a  double  pay, 
And  join  the  labours  of  the  night  and  day. 

"  Within  a  long  recess  a  bay  there  lies, 
Edg'd  round  with  cliffs,  high  pointing  to  the  skies ; 
The  jutting  shores  that  swell  on  either  side 
Contract  its  mouth,  and  break  the  rushing  tide. 
Our  eager  sailors  seize  the  fair  retreat, 
And  bound  within  the  port  their  crowded  fleet : 
For  here  retir'd  the  sinking  billows  sleep. 
And  smiling  calmness  silver'd  o'er  the  deep. 
1  only  in  the  bay  refus'd  to  moor, 
And  fix'd,  without,  my  halsers  to  the  shore. 

11  From  thence  we  climb'd  a  point,  whose  airy  brow 
Commands  the  prospect  of  the  plains  below  : 
JNo  tracks  of  beasts,  or  signs  of  men,  we  found, 
But  smoky  volumes  rolling  from  the  ground. 


Book  10.  THE   ODYSSEY.  179 


Two  with  our  herald  thither  we  command, 
With  speed  to  learn  what  men  possess'd  the  land. 
They  went,  and  kept  the  wheel's  smooth  beaten  road 
Which  to  the  city  drew  the  mountain  wood  ; 
When  !o !  they  met,  beside  a  crystal  spring, 
The  daughter  of  Antiphates  the  king  ; 
She  to  Artacia's  silver  streams  came  down 
(Artacia's  streams  alone  supply  the  town  :) 
The  damsel  they  approach,  and  ask'd  what  race 
The  people  were  ?  who  monarch  of  the  place  1 
With  joy  the  maid  th'  unwary  strangers  heard, 
And  show'd  them  where  the  royal  dome  appear'd. 
They  went:  but  as  they  entering  saw  the  queen 
Of  size  enormous,  and  terrific  mien, 
(Not  yielding  to  some  bulky  mountain's  height) 
A  sudden  horror  struck  their  aching  sight ; 
Swift  at  her  call  her  husband  scour'd  away 
To  wreak  his  hunger  on  the  destin'd  prey : 
One  for  his  food  the  raging  glutton  slew, 
But  two  rush'd  out,  and  to  the  navy  flew. 

"  Balk'd  of  his  prey,  the  yelling  monster  flies, 
And  fills  the  city  with  his  hideous  cries ; 
A  ghastly  band  of  giants  hear  the  roar, 
And  pouring  down  the  mountains,  crowd  the  shore, 
Fragments  they  rend  from  off  the  craggy  brow, 
And  dash  the  ruins  on  the  ships  below : 
The  crackling  vessels  burst ;  hoarse  groans  arise : 
And  mingled  horrors  echo  to  the  skies! 
The  men,  like  fish,  they  stuck  upon  the  flood, 
And  cramm'd  their  filthy  throats  with  human  food. 
Whilst  thus  their  fury  rages  at  the  bay, 
My  sword  our  cables  cut,  1  call'd  to  weigh; 
And  charg'd  my  men,  as  they  from  fate  would  fly, 
Each  nerve  to  strain,  each  bending  oar  to  ply. 
The  sailors  catch  the  word,  their  oars  they  seize, 
And  sweep  with  equal  strokes  the  smoky  seas  ; 


180 


THE    ODYSSE  Y  . 


Book  10. 


Clear  of  the  rocks  th'  impatient  vessel  flies ; 
Whilst  in  the  port  each  wretch  encumber'd  dies. 
"With  earnest  haste  my  frighted  sailors  press, 
While  kindling  transports  glow'd  at  our  success ; 
But  the  sad  fate  that  did  our  friends  destroy 
Cool'd  every  breast,  and  damp'd  the  rising  joy. 

"Now  dropp'd  our  anchors  in  th'  iEa^an  bay, 
Where  Circe  dwelt,  the  daughter  of  the  day; 
Her  mother  Perse,  of  old  Ocean's  strain : 
Thus  from  the  sun  descended,  and  the  main 
(From  the  same  lineage  stern  JE&les  came, 
The  far-fam'd  brother  of  th'  enchantress  dame) 
Goddess,  and  queen,  to  whom  the  powers  belong 
Of  dreaful  magic,  and  commanding  song, 
Some  god  directing,  to  this  peaceful  bay 
Silent  we  came,  and  melancholy  lay, 
Spent  and  o'erwatch'd.   Two  days  and  nights  roli'd  on, 
And  now  the  third  succeeding  morning  shone. 
I  climb'd  a  cliff  with  spear  and  sword  in  hand, 
Whose  ridge  o'erlook'd  a  shady  length  of  land  ; 
To  learn  if  aught  of  mortal  works  appear, 
Or  cheerful  voice  of  mortal  strike  the  ear ! 
From  the  high  point  I  mark'd  in  distant  view, 
A  stream  of  curling  smoke,  ascending  blue, 
And  spiry  tops,  the  tufted  trees  above, 
Of  Circe's  palace  bosom'd  in  the  grove. 

"  Thither  to  haste,  the  region  to  explore, 
Was  first  my  thought :  but  speeding  back  to  shore 
I  deem'd  it  best  to  visit  first  my  crew, 
And  send  out  spies  the  dubious  coast  to  view. 
As  down  the  hill  I  solitary  go, 
Some  power  divine  who  pities  human  wo 
Sent  a  tall  stag,  descending  from  the  wood, 
To  cool  his  fervour  in  the  crystal  flood ; 
Luxuriant  on  the  wave-worn  bank  he  lay, 
Stretch'd  forth,  and  panting  in  the  sunny  ray. 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


I  launch'd  my  spear,  and  with  a  sudden  wound 
Transpierc'd  his  back,  and  fix'd  him  to  the  ground. 
He  falls,  and  mourns  his  fate  with  human  cries : 
Through  the  wide  wound  the  vital  spirit  flies. 
I  drew,  and  casting  on  the  river  side  ^ 
The  bloody  spear,  his  gather'd  feet  I  tied  > 
With  twining  osiers  which  the  bank  supplied.  ) 
An  ell  in  length  the  pliant  whisp  I  weav'd, 
And  the  huge  body  on  my  shoulders  heav'd  : 
Then  leaning  on  the  spear  with  both  my  hands, 
Upborne  my  load,  and  press'd  the  sinking  sands 
With  weighty  steps,  till  at  the  ship  I  threw 
The  welcome  burden,  and  bespoke  my  crew : 

1  Cheer  up,  my  friends !  it  is  not  yet  our  fate 
To  glide  with  ghosts  through  Pluto's  gloomy  gate. 
Food  in  the  desert  land,  behold  !  is  given, 
Live,  and  enjoy  the  providence  of  heaven.5 

"  The  joyful  crew  survey  his  mighty  size, 
And  on  the  future  banquet  feast  their  eyes, 
As  huge  in  length  extended  lay  the  beast ; 
Then  wash  their  hands,  and  hasten  to  the  feast. 
There  till  the  setting  sun  roll'd  down  the  light, 
They  sat  indulging  in  the  genial  rite. 
When  evening  rose,  and  darkness  cover'd  o'er 
The  face  of  things,  we  slept  along  the  shore. 
But  when  the  rosy  morning  warm'd  the  east, 
My  men  I  summon'd  and  these  words  address'd : 

'  Followers  and  friends ;  attend  what  I  propose  : 
Ye  sad  companions  of  Ulysses'  woes ! 
We  know  not  here  what  land  before  us  lies,  ) 
Or  to  what  quarter  now  we  turn  our  eyes,  > 
Or  where  the  sun  shall  set,  or  where  shall  rise.  3 
Here  let  us  think  (if  thinking  be  not  vain) 
Jf  any  counsel,  any  hope  remain. 
Alas !  from  yonder  promontory's  brow, 
1  view'd  the  coast,  a  region  flat  and  low  ; 


182 


THB  ODYSSEY. 


Book 


An  isle  encircled  with  the  boundless  flood ; 
A  length  of  thickets,  and  entangled  wood. 
Some  smoke  t  saw  amid  the  forest  rise, 
And  all  around  it  only  seas  and  skies !' 

"  With  broken  hearts  my  sad  companions  stood, 
Mindful  of  Cyclops  and  his  human  food, 
And  horrid  Lsestrigons,  the  men  of  blood. 
Presaging  tears  apace  began  to  rain ; 
But  tears  in  mortal  miseries  are  vain. 
In  equal  parts  I  straight  divide  my  band, 
And  name  a  chief  each  party  to  command, 
I  led  the  one,  and  of  the  other  side 
Appointed  brave  Eurylochus  the  guide. 
Then  in  the  brazen  helm  the  lots  we  throw, 
And  fortune  casts  Eurylochus  to  go: 
He  march'd,  with  twice  eleven  in  his  train : 
Pensive  they  march,  and  pensive  we  remain. 

"  The  palace  in  a  woody  vale  they  found, 
High  rais'd  of  stone  ;  a  shaded  space  around  : 
Where  mountain  wolves  and  brindled  lions  roam, 
(By  magic  tam'd)  familiar  to  the  dome. 
With  gentle  blandishment  our  men  they  meet, 
And  wag  their  tails,  and  fawning  lick  their  feet. 
As  from  some  feast  a  man  returning  late, 
His  faithful  dogs  all  meet  him  at  the  gate, 
Rejoicing  round,  some  morsel  to  receive 
(Such  as  the  good  man  ever  us'd  to  give:) 
Domestic  thus  the  grizzly  beasts  drew  near : 
They  gaze  with  wonder,  not  unmix'd  with  fear. 
Now  on  the  threshold  of  the  dome  they  stood, 
And  heard  a  voice  resounding  through  the  wood  : 
Plac'd  at  her  loom  within,  the  goddess  sung; 
The  vaulted  roofs  and  solid  pavement  rung, 
O'er  the  fair  web  the  rising  figures  shine. 
Immortal  labour !  worthy  hands  divine. 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


183 


Polites  to  the  rest  the  question  mov'd 
(A  gallant  leader,  and  a  man  I  lov'd  :) 

1  What  voice  celestial,  chanting  to  the  loom, 
Or  nymph  or  goddess,  echoes  from  the  room  1 
Say  shall  we  seek  access  V  With  that  they  call ; 
And  wide  unfold  the  portals  of  the  hall. 

"  The  goddess,  rising,  asks  her  guests  to  stay, 
"Who  blindly  follow  where  she  leads  the  way. 
Eurylochus  alone  of  all  the  band, 
Suspecting  fraud,  more  prudently  remain'd. 
On  thrones  around  with  downy  coverings  grac'd, 
With  semblance  fair  th'  unhappy  men  she  plac'd. 
Milk  newly  press'd,  the  sacred  flour  of  wheat, 
And  honey  fresh,  and  Pramnian  wines,  the  treat : 
But  venom'd  was  the  bread,  and  mix'd  the  bowl, 
With  drugs  of  force  to  darken  all  the  soul  : 
Soon  in  the  luscious  feast  themselves  they  lost, 
And  drank  oblivion  of  their  native  coast. 
Instant  her  circling  wand  the  goddess  waves, 
To  hogs  transforms  them,  and  the  sty  receives. 
No  more  was  seen  the  human  form  divine ; 
Head,  face,  and  members  bristle  into  swine : 
Still  curs'd  with  sense,  their  minds  remain  alone, 
And  their  own  voice  affrights  them  when  they  groan. 
Meanwhile  the  goddess  in  disdain  bestows  • 
The  mast  and  acorn,  brutal  food !  and  strown 
The  fruits  of  cornel,  as  their  feast  around  ; 
Now  prone  and  grovelling  on  unsavoury  ground. 

"  Eurylochus  with  pensive  steps  and  slow, 
Aghast  returns  ;  the  messenger  of  wo, 
And  bitter  fate.    To  speak  he  made  essay,  } 
In  vain  essay'd,  nor  would  his  tongue  obey,  > 
His  swelling  heart  denied  the  words  their  way :  ) 
But  speaking  tears  the  want  of  words  supply, 
And  the  full  soul  bursts  copious  from  the  eye. 


184 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  10. 


Affrighted,  anxious  for  our  fellows'  fates, 
We  press'd  to  hear  what  sadly  he  relates. 

1  We  went,  Ulysses !  (such  was  thy  command) 
Through  the  lone  thicket,  and  the  desert  land. 
A  palace  in  a  woody  vale  we  found 
Brown  with  dark  forests,  and  with  shades  around. 
A  voice  celestial  echoed  from  the  dome, 
Or  nymph,  or  goddess,  chanting  to  the  loom. 
Access  we  sought,  nor  was  access  denied  : 
Radiant  she  came  ;  the  portals  open'd  wide : 
The  goddess  mild  invites  the  guests  to  stay  : 
They  blindly  follow  where  she  leads  the  way. 
I  only  wait  behind,  of  all  the  train : 
1  waited  long,  and  ey'd  the  doors  in  vain  : 
The  rest  are  vanish'd,  none  repass'd  the  gate ; 
And  not  a  man  appears  to  tell  their  fate.3 

"  I  heard,  and  instant  o'er  my  shoulders  flung 
The  belt  in  which  my  weighty  falchion  hung ; 
(A  beamy  blade)  then  seiz'd  the  bended  bow, 
And  bade  him  guide  the  way;  resolv'd  to  go. 
He  prostrate  falling,  with  both  hands  embraced 
My  knees,  and  weeping  thus  his  suit  address'd : 

'  O  king  belov'd  of  Jove  !  thy  servant  spare, 
And  ah,  thyself  the  rash  attempt  forbear  1 
Never,  alas !  thou  never  shalt  return, 
Or  see  the  wretched  for  whose  loss  we  mourn. 
With  what  remains  from  certain  ruin  fly, 
And  save  the  few  not  fated  yet  to  die.1 

"  I  answer'd  stern  :  '  Inglorious  then  remain, 
Here  feast  and  loiter,  and  desert  thy  train. 
Alone,  unfriended,  will  I  tempt  my  way; 
The  laws  of  fate  compel,  and  1  obey.' 

"  This  said,  and  scornful  turning  from  the  shore 
My  haughty  step,  I  stalk'd  the  valley  o'er. 
Till  now  approaching  nigh  the  magic  bower, 
Where  dwelt  th'  enchantress  skill'd  in  herbs  of  power ; 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


185 


A  form  divine  forth  issuing  from  the  wood, 
(Immortal  Hermes  with  the  golden  rod) 
In  human  semblance.    On  his  bloomy  face 
Youth  smil'd  celestial,  with  each  opening  grace. 
He  seiz'd  my  hand,  and  gracious  thus  began : 
1  Ah,  whither  roam'st  thou  1  much-enduring  man ! 
O  blind  to  fate  1  what  led  thy  steps  to  rove 
The  horid  mazes  of  this  magic  grove  1 
Each  friend  you  seek  in  yon  enclosure  lies, 
All  lost  their  form,  and  habitants  of  styes. 
Think'st  thou  by  wit  to  model  their  escape  1 
Sooner  shalt  thou,  a  stranger  to  thy  shape, 
Fall  prone  their  equal :  first  thy  danger  know, 
Then  take  the  antidote  the  gods  bestow. 
The  plant  I  give  through  all  the  direful  bow'r 
Shall  guard  thee,  and  avert  the  evil  hour. 
Now  hear  her  wicked  arts.    Before  thy  eyes 
The  bowl  shall  sparkle,  and  the  banquet  rise ; 
Take  this,  nor  from  the  faithless  feast  abstain, 
For  temper'd  drugs  and  poisons  shall  be  vain. 
Soon  as  she  strikes  her  wand,  and  gives  the  word, 
Draw  forth  and  brandish  thy  refulgent  sword, 
And  menace  death:  those  menaces  shall  move 
Her  alter'd  mind  to  blandishment  and  love. 
Nor  shun  the  blessing  proffer'd  to  thy  arms  ; 
Ascend  her  bed,  and  taste  celestial  charms : 
So  shall  thy  tedious  toils  a  respite  find, 
And  thy  lost  friends  return  to  human  kind. 
But  swear  her  first  by  those  dread  oaths  that  tie 
The  powers  below,  the  blessed  in  the  sky  ; 
Lest  to  thee,  naked,  secret  fraud  be  meant, 
Or  magic  bind  thee,  cold  and  impotent.' 

"Thus  while  he  spoke,  the  sovereign  plant  he  drewj 
Where  on  th'  all-bearing  earth  unmark'd  it  grew, 
And  show'd  its  nature  and  its  wondrous  power : 
Black  was  the  root,  but  milky-white  the  flower, ; 


186 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  10. 


Moly  the  name,  to  mortals  hard  to  find, 
But  all  is  easy  to  th'  ethereal  kind. 
This  Hermes  gave,  then  gliding  off  the  glade 
Shot  to  Olympus  from  the  woodland  shade. 

"  While  full  of  thought,  revolving  fates  to  come, 
I  speed  my  passage  to  th*  enchanted  dome : 
Arriv'd,  before  the  lofty  gates  I  stay'd; 
The  lofty  gates  the  goddess  wide  display'd; 
She  leads  before,  and  to  the  feast  invites; 
I  follow  sadly  to  the  magic  rites. 
Radiant  with  starry  studs,  a  silver  seat 
Receiv'd  my  limbs ;  a  footstool  eas'd  my  feet. 
She  mix'd  the  potion,  fraudulent  of  soul; 
The  poison  mantled  in  the  golden  bowl. 
I  took,  and  quaff'd  it,  confident  in  heaven: 
Then  wav'd  the  wand,  and  then  the  word  was  given. 
1  Hence  to  thy  fellows  !  (dreadful  she  began) 
Go,  be  a  beast!'— I  heard,  and  yet  was  man. 

"  Then  sudden  whirling,  like  a  waving  flame, 
My  beamy  falchion,  I  assault  the  dame. 
Struck  with  unusual  fear,  she  trembling  cries, 
She  faints,  she  falls ;  she  lifts  her  weeping  eyes. 

*  What  art  thou  1  say  !  from  whence,  from  whom  you 
came  1 

O  more  than  human !  tell  thy  race,  thy  name. 

Amazing  strength,  these  poisons  to  sustain  ! 

Not  mortal  thou,  nor  mortal  is  thy  brain. 

Or  art  thou  he,  the  man  to  come  (foretold 

By  Hermes  powerful  with  the  wand  of  gold,) 

The  man  from  Troy,  who  wander'd  ocean  round ; 

The  man  for  wisdom's  various  arts  renown'd, 

Ulysses?  oh!  thy  threatening  fury  cease, 

Sheathe  thy  bright  sword,  and  join  our  hands  in  peace ; 

Let  mutual  joys  our  mutual  trust  combine, 

And  love,  and  love-born  confidence  be  thine/ 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


187 


1  And  how,  dread  Circe  !  (furious  I  rejoin) 
Can  love  and  love-born  confidence  be  mine  1 
Beneath  thy  charms  when  my  companions  groan, 
Transform'd  to  beasts,  with  accents  not  their  own, 
O  thou  of  fraudful  heart!  shall  I  be  led 
To  share  thy  feast-rites,  or  ascend  thy  bed  : 
That,  all  unarm'd,  thy  vengeance  may  have  vent, 
And  magic  bind  me,  cold  and  impotent  1 
Celestial  as  thou  art,  yet  stand  denied  ; 
Or  swear  that  oath  by  which  the  gods  are  tied, 
Swear  in  thy  soul  no  latent  frauds  remain, 
Swear  by  the  vow  which  never  can  be  vain." 

"The  goddess  swore :  then  seiz'd  my  hand,  and  led 
To  the  sweet  transports  of  the  genial  bed. 
Ministrant  to  their  queen  with  busy  care 
Four  faithful  handmaids  the  soft  rites  prepare; 
Nymphs  sprung  from  fountains,  or  from  shady  woods, 
Or  the  fair  offspring  of  the  sacred  floods. 
One  o'er  the  couches  painted  carpets  threw, 
Whose  purple  lustre  glowM  against  the  view: 
While  linen  lay  beneath.    Another  plac'd 
The  silver  stands  with  golden  flaskets  grac'd  : 
With  dulcet  beverage  this  the  beaker  crown' d, 
Fair  in  the  midst,  with  gilded  cups  around : 
That  in  the  tripod  o'er  the  kindled  pile 
The  water  pours ;  the  bubbling  waters  boil : 
An  ample  vace  receives  the  smoking  wave; 
And,  in  the  bath  prepar'd  my  limbs  I  lave : 
Reviving  sweets  repair  the  mind's  decay, 
And  take  the  painful  sense  of  toil  away. 
A  vest  and  tunic  o'er  me  next  she  threw, 
Fresh  from  the  bath,  and  dropping  balmy  dew, 
Then  led  and  placM  me  on  the  sovereign  seat, 
With  carpets  spread  ;  a  footstool  at  my  feet. 
The  golden  ewer  a  nymph  obsequious  brings, 
Replenished  from  the  cool  translucent  springs  ; 


188 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  10. 


With  copious  water  the  bright  vase  supplies 
A  silver  laver  of  capacious  size. 
I  wash'd.    The  table  in  fair  order  spread, 
They  heap  the  glittering  canisters  with  bread ; 
Viands  of  various  kinds  allure  the  taste, 
Of  choicest  sort  and  savour,  rich  repast ! 
Circe  in  vain  invites  the  feast  to  share ; 
Absent  1  ponder,  and  absorb'd  in  care : 
While  scenes  of  wo  rose  anxious  in  my  breast, 
The  queen  beheld  me,  and  these  words  address'd : 

'  Why  sits  Ulysses  silent  and  apart, 
Some  hoard  of  grief  close  harbour'd  at  his  heart? 
Untouched  before  thee  stand  the  cates  divine, 
And  unregarded  laughs  the  rosy  wine. 
Can  yet  a  doubt,  or  any  dread  remain, 
When  sworn  that  oath  which  never  can  be  vainl" 

li  1  answer'd,  ' Goddess!  humane  is  thy  breast, 
By  justice  sway'd,  by  tender  pity  pressM  : 
111  fits  it  me,  whose  friends  are  sunk  to  beasts, 
To  quaff  thy  bowls,  or  riot  in  thy  feasts. 
Me  wouldst  thou  please  ?  for  them  thy  cares  employ, 
And  them  to  me  restore,  and  me  to  joy.1 

"  With  that,  she  parted  :  in  her  potent  hand 
She  bore  the  virtue  of  the  magic  wand. 
Then  hastening  to  the  styes,  set  wide  the  door, 
Urg'd  forth,  and  drove  the  bristly  herd  before; 
Unwieldy,  out  they  rush'd,  with  general  cry, 
Enormous  beasts  dishonest  to  the  eye. 
Now  touch'd  by  counter-charms,  they  change  again, 
And  stand  majestic,  and  recall'd  to  men. 
Those  hairs  of  late  that  bristled  every  part, 
Fall  off;  miraculous  effect  of  art ! 
Till  all  the  form  in  full  proportion  rise, 
More  young,  more  large,  more  graceful  to  my  eyes. 
They  saw  ;  they  knew  me,  and  with  eager  pace 
Clung  to  their  master  in  a  long  embrace ; 


Book  10.  THE  ODYSSEY. 


Sad  pleasing  sight !  with  tears  each  eye  ran  o'er, 
And  sobs  of  joy  re-echoed  through  the  bow'r : 
E'en  Circe  wept,  her  adamantine  heart 
Felt  pity  enter,  and  sustain'd  her  part. 

'  Son  of  Laertes  !  (then  the  queen  began) 
Oh  much-enduring,  much-experienc'd  man  ! 
Haste  to  the  vessel  on  the  sea-beat  shore, 
Unload  thy  treasures,  and  the  galley  moor : 
Then  bring  thy  friends,  secure  from  future  harms, 
And  in  our  grottos  stow  thy  spoils  and  arms.' 

1  She  said.    Obedient  to  her  high  command 
I  quit  the  place,  and  hasten  to  the  strand, 
My  sad  companions  on  the  beach  I  found, 
Their  wistful  eyes  in  floods  of  sorrow  drown'd. 
As  from  fresh  pastures  and  the  dewy  field 
(When  loaded  cribs  their  evening  banquet  yield) 
The  lowing  herds  return ;  around  them  throng 
With  leaps  and  bounds  their  late-imprison'd  young, 
Rush  to  their  mothers  with  unruly  joy, 
And  echoing  hills  return  the  tender  cry : 
So  round  me  press'd,  exulting  at  my  sight, 
With  cries  and  agonies  of  wild  delight, 
The  weeping  sailors;  nor  less  fierce  their  joy 
Than  if  return'd  to  Ithaca  from  Troy. 
*  Ah,  master  !  ever  honour'd,  ever  dear, 
(These  tender  words  on  every  side  I  hear) 
What  other  joy  can  equal  thy  return  1 
Not  that  lov'd  country  for  whose  sight  we  mourn, 
The  soil  that  nurs'd  us,  and  that  gave  us  breath : 
But,  ah  !  relate  our  lost  companions'  death.' 

"  I  answer'd  cheerful :  ■  Haste,  your  galley  moor, 
And  bring  our  treasures  and  our  arms  ashore  : 
Those  in  yon  hollow  caverns  let  us  lay; 
Then  rise  and  follow  where  I  lead  the  way. 
Your  fellows  live  :  believe  your  eyes,  and  come 
To  taste  the  joys  of  Circe's  sacred  dome.' 


190  THE    ODYSSEY.  Book  10. 

"  With  ready  speed  the  joyful  crew  obey  : 
Alone  Eurylochus  persuades  their  stay. 
1  Whither  (he  cried)  ah  whither  will  ye  runl 
Seek  ye  to  meet  those  evils  ye  should  shun  % 
Will  you  the  terrors  of  the  dome  explore, 
In  swine  to  grovel,  or  in  lions  roar, 
Or  wolf-like  howl  away  the  midnight  hour 
In  dreadful  watch  around  the  magic  bow'r  1 
Remember  Cyclops,  and  his  bloody  deed  ; 
The  leader's  rashness  made  the  soldiers  bleed.' 

11 1  heard  incens'd,  and  first  resolv'd  to  speed 
My  flying  falchion  at  the  rebel's  head. 
Dear  as  he  was,  by  ties  of  kindred  bound, 
This  hand  had  stretch'd  him  breathless  on  the  ground ; 
But  all  at  once  my  interposing  train 
For  mercy  pleaded,  nor  could  plead  in  vain. 

'Leave  here  the  man  who  dares  his  prince  desert, 
Leave  to  repentance  and  his  own  sad  heart, 
To  guard  the  ship.    Seek  we  the  sacred  shades 
Of  Circe's  palace,  where  Ulysses  leads.' 

"  This  with  one  voice  declar'd,  the  rising  train 
Left  the  black  vessel  by  the  murmuring  main. 
Shame  touched  Eurylochus's  altered  breast, 
He  fear'd  my  threats,  and  follow'd  with  the  rest. 

"  Meanwhile  the  goddess,  with  indulgent  cares 
And  social  joys,  the  late-transform'd  repairs  ; 
The  bath,  the  feast,  their  fainting  soul  renews; 
Rich  in  refulgent  robes,  and  dropping  balmy  dews : 
Brightening  with  joy  their  eager  eyes  behold 
Each  other's  face,  and  each  his  story  told ; 
Then  gushing  tears  the  narrative  confound, 
And  with  their  sobs  the  vaulted  roofs  resound. 
When  hush'd  their  passion,  thus  the  goddess  cries: 
{  Ulysses,  taught  by  labours  to  be  wise, 
Let  this  short  memory  of  grief  suffice. 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


To  me  are  known  the  various  woes  ye  bore, 
In  storms  by  sea,  in  perils  on  the  shore ; 
Forget  whatever  was  in  fortune's  pow'r, 
And  share  the  pleasures  of  this  genial  hour. 
Such  be  your  minds  as  ere  ye  left  your  coast, 
Or  learn'd  to  sorrow  for  a  country  lost. 
Exiles  and  wanderers  now,  where'er  ye  go, 
Too  faithful  memory  renews  your  wo: 
The  cause  renew'd,  habitual  griefs  remain, 
And  the  soul  saddens  by  the  use  of  pain.' 

"  Her  kind  entreaty  mov'd  the  general  breast ; 
Tir'd  with  long  toil,  we  willing  sunk  to  rest. 
We  plied  the  banquet  and  the  bowl  we  crown'd, 
Till  the  full  circle  of  the  year  came  round. 
But  when  the  seasons,  following  in  their  train, 
Brought  back  the  months,  the  days  and  hours  again 
As  from  a  lethargy  at  once  they  rise, 
And  urge  their  chief  with  animating  cries. 

i  Is  this,  Ulysses,  our  inglorious  lot  1 
And  is  the  name  of  Ithaca  forgot? 
Shall  never  the  dear  land  in  prospect  rise. 
Or  the  lov'd  palace  glitter  in  our  eyesT 

"  Melting  I  heard  ;  yet  till  the  sun's  decline 
Prolong'd  the  feast,  and  quaff'd  the  rosy  wine  : 
But  when  the  shades  came  on  at  evening  hour, 
And  all  lay  slumbering  in  the  dusky  bow'r ; 
I  came  a  suppliant  to  fair  Circe's  bed, 
The  tender  moment  seiz'd,  and  thus  I  said  ; 

1  Be  mindful,  goddess,  of  thy  promise  made  ; 
Must  sad  Ulysses  ever  be  delay'd  1 
Around  their  lord  my  sad  companions  mourn, 
Each  breast  beats  homeward,  anxious  to  return  : 
If  but  a  moment  parted  from  thy  eyes, 
Their  tears  flow  round  me,  and  my  heart  complies.' 

'Go  then  (she  cry'd,)  ah  go  1  yet  think,  not  I, 
Not  Circe,  but  the  fates  your  wish  deny. 


192 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  10 


Ah  hope  not  yet  to  breathe  thy  native  air  ! 
Far  other  journey  first  demands  thy  care  ; 
To  tread  th'  uncomfortable  paths  beneath, 
And  view  the  realms  of  darkness  and  of  death. 
There  seek  the  Theban  bard,  depriv'd  of  sight ; 
"Within,  irradiate  with  prophetic  light ; 
To  whom  Persephone,  entire  and  whole, 
Gave  to  retain  th5  unseparated  soul : 
The  rest  are  forms,  of  empty  aether  made ; 
Impassive  semblance,  and  the  flitting  shade.' 

"  Struck  at  the  word,  my  very  heart  was  dead : 
Pensive  I  sat ;  my  tears  bedew' d  the  bed  ; 
To  hate  the  light  and  life  rny  soul  begun, 
And  saw  that  all  was  grief  beneath  the  sun. 
Compos'd  at  length,  the  gushing  tears  suppress'd, 
And  my  toss'd  limbs  now  wearied  into  rest, 
*  How  shall  I  tread  (I  cried,)  ah  Circe !  say, 
The  dark  descent,  and  who  shall  guide  the  way  1 
Can  living  eyes  behold  the  realms  below  1 
What  bark  to  waft  me,  and  what  wind  to  blow  V 

1  Thy  fated  road  (the  magic  power  replied,) 
Divine  Ulysses  !  asks  no  mortal  guide. 
Rear  but  the  mast,  the  spacious  sail  display, 
The  northern  winds  shall  wing  thee  on  thy  way. 
Soon  shalt  thou  reach  old  ocean's  utmost  ends, 
Where  to  the  main  the  shelving  shore  descends  ; 
The  barren  trees  of  Proserpine's  black  woods, 
Poplars  and  willows  trembling  o'er  the  floods : 
There  fix  thy  vessel  in  the  lonely  bay, 
And  enter  there  the  kingdoms  void  of  day  : 
Where  Phlegeton's  loud  torrents  rushing  down, 
Hiss  in  the  flaming  gulf  of  Achion : 
And  where,  slow-rolling  from  the  Stygian  bed, 
Cocytus'  lamentable  waters  spread  : 
Where  the  dark  rock  o'erhangs  th'  infernal  lake, 
And  mingling  streams  eternal  murmurs  make. 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


First  draw  thy  falchion,  and  on  every  side, 

Trench  the  black  earth  a  cubit  long  and  wide ; 

To  all  the  shades  around  libations  pour, 

And  o'er  th'  ingredient  strew  the  hallow'd  flour  : 

New  wine  and  milk,  with  honey  temper'd,  bring, 

And  living  water  from  the  crystal  spring, 

Then  the  wan  shades  and  feeble  ghosts  implore, 

With  promis'd  offerings  on  thy  native  shore  ; 

A  barren  cow,  the  stateliest  of  the  isle, 

And  heapM  with  various  wealth,  a  blazing  pile  : 

These  to  the  rest ;  but  to  the  seer  must  bleed 

A  sable  ram,  the  pride  of  all  thy  breed. 

These  solemn  vows  and  holy  offerings  paid 

To  all  the  phantom-nations  of  the  dead ; 

Be  next  thy  care  the  sable  sheep  to  place 

Full  o'er  the  pit,  and  hell -ward  turn  their  face  : 

But  from  th'  infernal  rite  thine  eye  withdraw, 

And  back  to  ocean  glance  with  reverend  awe. 

Sudden  shall  skim  along  the  dusky  glades 

Thin  airy  shoals  of  visionary  shades. 

Then  give  command  the  sacrifice  to  haste, 

Let  the  flay'd  victims  in  the  flame  be  cast, 

And  sacred  vows,  and  mystic  song  applied 

To  grisly  Pluto,  and  his  gloomy  bride. 

Wide  o'er  the  pool,  thy  falchion  wav'd  around 

Shall  drive  the  spectres  from  forbidden  ground  : 

The  sacred  draught  shall  all  the  dead  forbear, 

Till  awful  from  the  shades  arise  the  seer. 

Let  him,  oraculous,  the  end.  the  way, 

The  turns  of  all  thy  future  fate,  display, 

Thy  pilgrimage  to  come,  and  remnant  of  thy  day.' 

u  So  speaking,  from  the  ruddy  orient  shone 
The  morn  conspicuous  on  her  golden  throne. 
The  goddess  with  a  radiant  tunic  dress'd 
My  limbs,  and  o'er  me  cast  a  silken  vest. 
N 


194 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  10. 


Long  flowing  robes,  of  purest  white,  array 
The  nymph  that  added  lustre  to  the  day  : 
A  tiar  wreath'il  her  head  with  many  a  fold; 
Her  waist  was  circled  with  a  zone  of  gold. 
Forth  issuing  then,  from  place  to  place  1  flew; 
Rouse  man  by  man,  and  animate  my  crew. 
4  Rise,  rise,  my  mates  !  'tis  Circe  gives  command  : 
Our  journey  calls  us;  haste,  and  quit  the  land.' 
All  rise  and  follow,  yet  depart  not  all, 
for  fate  decreed  one  wretched  man  to  fall. 

11  A  youth  there  was,  Elpenor  was  he  nam'd, 
rCot  much  for  sense,  nor  much  tor  courage,  fam'd  ; 
The  youngest  of  our  band,  a  vulgar  soul 
Born  but  to  banquet,  and  to  drain  the  bowl. 
He,  hot  and  careless,  on  a  turret's  height 
With  sleep  repair'd  the  long  debauch  of  night : 
The  sudden  tumult  stirr'd  him  where  he  lay, 
And  down  he  haslen'd,  but  furgot  the  way  ; 
Full  endlong  from  the  roof  the  sleeper  fell, 
And  snapp'd  the  spinal  joint,  and  wak'd  in  hell. 

*'  The  rest  crowd  round  me  with  an  eager  look  ; 
I  met  them  with  a  sigh,  and  thus  bespoke  : 
4  Already,  friends  !  ye  think  your  toils  are  o'er, 
Your  hopes  already  touch  your  native  shore: 
Alas!  far  otherwise  the  nymph  declares, 
Far  other  journey  lirst  demands  our  cares; 
To  tread  th'  uncomfortable  paths  beneath, 
The  dreary  realms  of  darkness  and  of  death  : 
To  seek  Tiresias'  awful  shade  below, 
And  thence  our  fortunes  and  our  fates  to  know.' 

"My  sad  companions  heard  in  deep  despair : 
Frantic  they  tore  their  manly  growth  of  hair  ; 
To  earth  they  fell ;  the  tears  began  to  rain  ; 
But  tears  in  mortal  miseries  are  vain. 
Sadly  they  far'd  along  the  sea-beat  shore; 
StilJ  heav'd  their  hearts,  and  still  their  eyes  ran  o'er. 


Book  10. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


The  ready  victims  at  our  bark  we  found, 

The  sable  ewe,  and  ram,  together  bound  : 

For  swift  as  thought  the  goddess  had  been  there, 

And  thence  had  glided,  viewless  as  the  air: 

The  paths  of  gods  what  mortal  can  survey? 

Who  eyes  their  motion,  who  shall  trace  their  way  ? 


BOOK  XI. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE    DESCENT    INTO  HELL. 

ULYSSES  continues  his  narration— How  he  arrived  at  the  land 
of  the  Cimmerians,  and  what  ceremonies  he  performed  to  in- 
voke t  he  dead.  The  manner  of  his  descent,  and  the  apparition 
of  the  shades ;  his  conversation  with  Elpenor,  and  with  Tire- 
sias,  who  informs  him  in  a  prophetic  manner  of  his  fortunes  to 
come.  He  meets  his  mother  Anticlea,  from  whom  he  learns 
the  slate  of  his  family.  He  sees  the  shades  of  the  ancient  he- 
roines, afterwards,  of  the  heroes,  and  converses  in  particular 
with  Agamemnon  and  Achilles.  Ajax  keeps  at  a  sullen  dis- 
tance, and  disdains  to  answer  him.  He  then  beholds  Tityus, 
Tantalus,  Sisyphus,  Hercules ;  till  he  is  deterred  from  further 
curiosity  by  the  apparition  of  horrid  spectres,  and  the  cries  of 
the  wicked  in  torments, 

"  Now  to  the  shores  we  bend,  a  mournful  train, 
Climb  the  tall  bark  and  launch  into  the  main  : 
At  once  the  mast  we  rear,  at  once  unbind 
The  spacious  sheet,  and  stretch  it  to  the  wind: 
Then  pale  and  pensive  stand,  with  cares  oppress'd, 
And  solemn  horror  saddens  every  breast. 
A  freshening  breeze  the  magic  power  supplied. 
While  the  wing'd  vessel  flew  along  the  tide  j 


198 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


Our  oars  we  shipp'd :  all  day  the  swelling  sails 
Full  from  the  guiding  pilot  catch'd  the  gales. 

"Now  sunk  the  sun  from  his  aerial  height, 
And  o'er  the  shaded  billows  rush'd  the  night: 
When  lo  !  we  reach'd  old  Ocean's  utmost  bounds, 
Where  rocks  control  his  waves  with  ever-during  mounds. 

"  There  in  a  lonely  land,  and  gloomy  cells, 
The  dusky  nation  of  Cimmeria  dwells  ; 
The  sun  ne'er  views  th5  uncomfortable  seats, 
When  radiant  he  advances  or  retreats: 
Unhappy  race  !  whom  endless  night  invades, 
Clouds  the  dull  air,  and  wraps  them  round  in  shades. 

il  The  ship  we  moor  on  these  obscure  abodes ; 
Disbark  the  sheep,  an  offering  to  the  gods  ; 
And  hell-ward  bending,  o'er  the  beach  descry 
The  dolesome  passage  to  th'  infernal  sky. 
The  victims  vow'd  to  each  Tartarean  pow'r, 
Eurylochus  and  Perimedes  bore. 

11  Here  open'd  hell,  all  hell  I  here  implor'd, 
And  from  the  scabbard  drew  the  shining  sword ; 
And  trenching  the  black  earth  on  every  side, 
A  cavern  form'd,  a  cubit  long  and  wide. 
New  wine,  with  honey-temper'd  milk,  we  bring, 
Then  living  waters  from  the  crystal  spring ; 
O'er  these  was  strew'd  the  consecrated  flour, 
And  on  the  surface  shone  the  holy  store. 

"  Now  the  wan  shades  we  hail,  th'  infernal  gods, 
To  speed  our  course,  and  waft  us  o'er  the  floods  : 
So  shall  a  barren  heifer  from  the  stall 
Beneath  the  knife  upon  your  altars  fall ; 
So  in  our  palace,  at  our  safe  return 
Rich  with  unnumber'd  gifts  the  pile  shall  burn; 
So  shall  a  ram  the  largest  of  the  breed, 
Black  as  these  regions,  to  Tiresias  bleed. 

"  Thus  solemn  rites  and  holy  vows  we  paid 
To  all  the  phantom-nations  of  the  dead. 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


199 


Then  died  the  sheep ;  a  purple  torrent  flow'd, 
And  all  the  caverns  smokM  with  streaming  blood. 
*«  When  to !  appear'd  along  the  dusky  coasts, 
Thin,  airy  shoals  of  visionary  ghosts; 
Fair  pensive  youths,  and  soft  enatnour'd  maids ; 
And  wither'd  elders,  pale,  and  wrinkled  shades; 
Ghastly  with  wounds,  the  forms  of  warriors  slain 
Stalk'd  with  majestic  port,  a  marti;il  train  : 
These  and  a  thousand  more  swarm'd  o'er  the  ground, 
And  all  the  dire  assembly  shriek'd  around. 
Astonish'd  at  the  sight,  aghast  I  stood, 
And  a  cold  fear  ran  shivering  through  my  blood; 
Straight  I  command  the  sacrifice  to  haste, 
Straight  the  flayM  victims  to  the  flames  are  cast, 
And  mutter'd  vows,  and  mystic  song,  apply'd 
To  grisly  Pluto,  and  his  gloomy  bride. 

"  Now  swift  I  wav'd  my  falchion  o'er  the  blood  ; 
Back  started  the  pale  throngs  and  trembling  stood, 
Round  the  black  trench  the  gore  untasted  flows, j 
Till  awful  from  the  shades  Tiresias  rose. 

"  There  wandering  through  the  gloom,  1  first  survey'd, 
New  to  the  realms  of  death,  Elpenor's  shade: 
His  cold  remains  all  naked  to  the  sky, 
On  distant  shores  unwept,  unburied  lie. 
Sad  at  the  sight  I  stand,  deep  fix'd  in  wo, 
And  ere  I  spoke  the  tears  began  to  flow. 

'  O  say  what  angry  power  Elpenor  led 
To  glide  in  shades,  and  wander  with  the'dead? 
How  could  thy  soul,  by  realms  and  seas  disjoin'd, 
Outfly  the  nimble  sail,  and  leave  the  lagging  wind  V 

"  The  ghost  replied  :  1  To  hell  my  doom  1  owe, 
Demons  accurs'd,  dire  ministers  of  wo  ! 
My  feet,  through  wine  unfaithful  to  their  weight, 
Betray 'd  me  tumbling  from  a  towery  height: 
Staggering  I  reePd,  and  as  I  reel'd  I  fell, 
Lux'd  the  neck-joint — my  soul  descends  to  hell, 


200 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


But  lend  me  aid,  I  now  conjure  thee  lend, 
By  the  soft  tie  and  sacred  name  of  friend  ! 
By  thy  fond  consort !  by  thy  fathers  cares ! 
By  lov'd  Telemachus's  blooming  years  ! 
For  well  1  know  that  soon  the  heavenly  pow'rs 
Will  give  thee  back  to  day  and  Circe's  shores : 
There  pious  on  my  cold  remains  attend, 
There  call  to  mind  thy  poor  departed  friend ; 
The  tribute  of  a  tear  is  all  I  crave, 
And  the  possession  of  a  peaceful  grave. 
But  if,  unheard,  in  vain  compassion  plead, 
Revere  the  gods,  the  gods  avenge  the  dead  ! 
A  tomb  along  the  watery  margin  raise, 
The  tomb  with  manly  arms  and  trophies  grace, 
To  show  posterity  Elpenor  was. 
There  high  in  air,  memorial  of  my  name, 
Fix  the  smooth  oar,  and  bid  me  live  to  fame.' 

"To  whom  with  tears:  'These  rites,  O  mournful 
shade ! 

Due  to  thy  ghost,  shall  to  thy  ghost  be  paid.' 

"  Still  as  1  spoke,  the  phantom  seem'd  to  moan, 
Tear  follow'd  tear,  and  groan  succeeded  groan. 
But  as  my  waving  sword  the  blood  surrounds, 
The  shade  withdrew,  and  mutter'd  empty  sounds. 

"  There  as  the  wondrous  visions  I  survey'd, 
All  pale  ascends  my  royal  mothers  shade  : 
A  queen,  to  Troy  she  saw  our  legions  pass ; 
Now  a  thin  form  is  all  Ant  idea  was  ! 
Struck  at  the  sight  1  melt  with  filial  wo, 
And  down  my  cheek  the  pious  sorrows  flow : 
Yet  as  I  shook  my  falchion  o'er  the  blood, 
Regardless  of  her  son  the  parent  stood. 

"  When  lo!  the  mighty  Theban  1  behold; 
To  guide  his  steps  he  bore  a  staff  of  gold  : 
Awful  he  trod  !  majestic  was  his  look  ! 
And  from  his  holy  lips  these  accents  broke  : 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


201 


1  Why,  mortal,  wanderest  thou  from  cheerful  day. 
To  tread  the  downward  melancholy  way  1 
"What  angry  gods  to  these  dark  legions  led 
Thee  yet  alive,  companion  of  the  dead  ? 
But  sheathe  thy  poniard,  while  my  tongue  relates 
Heaven's  steadfast  purpose,  and  thy  future  fates.' 

M  While  ,yet  he  spoke,  the  prophet  I  obey'd, 
And  in  the  scabbard  plung'd  the  glittering  blade. 
Eager  he  quaff'd  the  gore,  and  then  express'd 
Dark  things  to  come,  the  counsels  of  his  breast. 

'  Weary  of  light,  Ulysses  here  explores, 
A  prosperous  voyage  to  his  native  shores : 
But  know — by  me  unerring  Fates  disclose 
New  trains  of  dangers,  and  new  scenes  of  woes ; 
I  see  !  1  see,  thy  bark  by  Neptune  tost, 
For  injur'd  Cyclops,  and  his  eye-ball  lost ! 
Yet  to  thy  woes  the  gods  decree  an  end, 
If  heaven  thou  please  ;  and  how  to  please  attend  ! 
Where  on  Trinacrian  rocks  the  ocean  roars, 
Graze  numerous  herds  along  the  verdant  shores; 
Though  hunger  press,  yet  fly  the  dangerous  prey, 
The  herds  are  sacred  to  the  god  of  day, 
Who  all  surveys  with  his  extensive  eye, 
Above,  below,  on  earth,  and  in  the  sky  ! 
Rob  not  the  god,  and  so  propitious  gales 
Attend  thy  voyage,  and  impel  thy  sails ; 
But  if  his  herds  ye  seize,  beneath  the  waves 
1  see  thy  friends  o'erwhelm'd  in  liquid  graves ! 
The  direful  wreck  Ulysses  scarce  survives  ! 
Ulysses  at  his  country  scarce  arrives ! 
Strangers  thy  guides  !  nor  there  thy  labours  end, 
New  foes  arise,  domestic  ills  attend  ! 
There  foul  adulterers  to  thy  bride  resort, 
And  lordly  gluttons  not  in  thy  court. 
But  vengeance  hastes  amain  !  Those  eyes  behold 
The  deathful  scene,  princes  on  princes  roll'd ! 


202 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


That  done,  a  people  far  from  sea  explore. 

Who  ne'er  knew  salt,  or  heard  the  billows  roar, 

Or  saw  gay  vessel  stem  the  watery  plain, 

A  painted  wonder  flying  on  the  main! 

Bear  on  thy  back  an  oar:  with  strange  amaze 

A  shepherd  meeting  thee,  the  oar  surveys, 

And  names  a  van  :  there  fix  it  on  the  plain, 

To  calm  the  god  that  holds  the  watery  reign ; 

A  threefold  offering  to  his  altar  bring, 

A  bull,  a  ram,  a  boar ;  and  hail  the  ocean-king. 

But  home  return 'd,  to  each  ethereal  power 

Slay  the  due  victim  in  the  genial  hour  : 

So  peaceful  shalt  thou  end  thy  blissful  days, 

And  steal  thyself  from  life  by  slow  decays  : 

Unknown  to  pain,  in  age  resign  thy  breath, 

When  late  stern  Neptune  points  the  shaft  with  death, 

To  the  dark  grave  retiring  as  to  rest, 

Thy  people  blessing,  by  thy  people  bless'd ! 

'  Unerring  truths,  O  man,  my  lips  relate  ; 
This  is  thy  life  to  come,  and  this  is  fate.' 

"  To  whom  unmov'd  ;  1  If  this  the  gods  prepare, 
What  heaven  ordains,  the  wise  with  courage  bear. 
But  say,  why  yonder  on  the  lonely  strands, 
Unmindful  of  her  son,  Anticlea  stands? 
Why  to  the  ground  she  bends  her  downcast  eye? 
Why  is  she  silent,  while  her  son  is  nigh  ? 
The  latent  cause,  O  sacred  seer,  reveal  V 

'  Nor  this  (replies  the  seer)  will  I  conceal. 
Know  ;  to  the  spectres,  that  thy  beverage  taste, 
The  scenes  of  life  recur,  and  actions  pass'd  ; 
They,  seal'd  with  truth,  return  the  sure  reply ; 
The  rest,  repell'd,  a  train  oblivious  fly.' 

"  The  phantom-prophet  ceas'd,  and  sunk  from  sight 
To  the  black  palace  of  eternal  night. 

"  Still  in  the  dark  abodes  of  death  1  stood, 
When  near  Anticlea  mov'd,  and  drank  the  blood. 


Book  11.  THE    ODYSSEY.  203 


Straight  all  the  mother  in  her  soul  awakes, 
And,  owning  her  Ulysses,  thus  she  speaks : 

*  Com'st  thou  my  son,  alive ;  to  realms  beneath, 
The  dolesome  realms  of  darkness  and  of  death  : 
Com'st  thou  alive  from  pure,  etherial  day  ? 
Dire  is  the  region,  dismal  is  the  way  ! 

Here  lakes  profound,  there  floods  oppose  their  waves, 
There  the  wide  sea  with  all  his  billows  raves ! 
Or  (since  to  dust  proud  Troy  submits  her  tow'rs) 
Com'st  thou  a  wanderer  from  the  Phrygian  shores  1 
Or  say,  since  honour  call'd  thee  to  the  field, 
Hast  thou  thy  Ithaca,  thy  bride,  beheld  V9 

'Source  of  my  life,  (I  cried)  from  earth  I  fly 
To  seek  Tiresias  in  the  nether  sky, 
To  learn  my  doom  ;  for,  tost  from  wo  to  wo, 
In  every  land  Ulysses  finds  a  foe  : 
Nor  have  these  eyes  beheld  my  native  shores, 
Since  in  the  dust  proud  Troy  submits  her  tow'rs. 

1  But,  when  thy  soul  from  her  sweet  mansion  fled, 
Say,  what  distemper  gave  thee  to  the  dead  1 
Has  life's  fair  lamp  declin'd  by  slow  decays, 
Or  swift  expir'd  it  in  a  sudden  blaze  ? 
Say,  if  my  sire,  good  old  Laertes,  lives  1 
If  yet  Telemachus,  my  son,  survives  1 
Say,  by  his  rule  is  my  dominion  aw'd, 
Or  crush'd  by  traitors  with  an  iron  rod  ? 
Say,  if  my  spouse  maintains  her  royal  trust, 
Though  tempted  chaste,  and  obstinately  just  1 
Or  if  no  more  her  absent  lord  she  wails, 
But  the  false  woman  o'er  the  wife  prevails  V 

"  Thus  I,  and  thus  the  parent-shade  returns : 

*  Thee,  ever  thee,  thy  faithful  consort  mourns : 
Whether  the  night  descends,  or  day  prevails, 
Thee  she  by  night,  and  thee  by  day  bewails : 
Thee  in  Telemachus  thy  realm  obeys ; 

In  sacred  groves  celestial  rites  he  pays, 


204 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


And  shares  the  banquet  in  superior  state, 

Grac'd  with  such  honours  as  become  the  great. 

Thy  sire  in  solitude  foments  his  care : 

The  court  is  joyless,  for  thou  art  not  there ! 

No  costly  carpets  raise  his  hoary  head, 

No  rich  embroidery  shines  to  grace  his  bed ; 

E'en  when  keen  winter  freezes  in  the  skies, 

Rank'd  with  his  slaves,  on  earth  the  monarch  lies: 

Deep  are  his  sighs,  his  visage  pale,  his  dress 

The  garb  of  wo  and  habit  of  distress. 

And  when  the  autumn  takes  his  annual  round, 

The  leafy  honours  scattering  on  the  ground ; 

Regardless  of  his  years,  abroad  he  lies, 

His  bed  the  leaves,  his  canopy  the  skies. 

Thus  cares  on  cares  his  painful  days  consume, 

And  bow  his  age  with  sorrow  to  the  tomb ! 

*  For  thee,  my  son,  I  wept  my  life  away ; 
For  thee  through  hell's  eternal  dungeons  stray  : 
Nor  came  my  fate  by  lingering  pains  and  slow, 
Nor  bent  the  silver-shafted  queen  her  bow  ; 
No  dire  disease  bereav'd  me  of  my  breath ; 
Thou,  thou,  my  son,  wert  my  disease  and  death; 
Unkindly  with  my  love  my  son  conspir'd, 
For  thee  I  liv'd,  for  absent  thee  expir'd.' 

"  Thrice  in  my  arms  1  strove  her  shade  to  bind  1 
Thrice  through  my  arms  she  slipp'd  like  empty  > 
Or  dreams,  the  vain  illusions  of  the  mind,    [wind,  ) 
Wild  with  despair,  1  shed  a  copious  tide 
Of  flowing  tears,  and  thus  with  sighs  replied  : 

1  Fly'st  thou,  lov'd  shade,  while  1  thus  fondly  mourn? 
Turn  to  my  arms,  to  my  embraces  turn ! 
Is  it,  ye  powers  that  smile  at  human  harms, 
Too  great  a  bliss  to  weep  within  her  arms  ? 
Or  has  hell's  queen  an  empty  image  sent, 
That  wretched  I  might  e'en  my  joys  lament  V 


Book  11. 


THE    OD  YSSEY. 


205 


'  O  son  of  wo !  (the  pensive  shade  rejoin'd) 
O  most  inur'd  to  grief  of  all  mankind  ! 
'Tis  not  the  queen  of  hell  who  thee  deceives  : 
All,  all  are  such,  when  life  the  body  leaves ; 
No  more  the  substance  of  the  man  remains, 
Nor  bounds  the  blood  along  the  purple  veins: 
These  the  funereal  flames  in  atoms  bear, 
To  wander  with  the  wind  in  empty  air; 
While  the  impassive  soul  reluctant  flies, 
Like  a  vain  dream,  to  these  infernal  skies. 
But  from  the  dark  dominions  speed  thy  way, 
And  climb  the  steep  ascent  to  upper  day ; 
To  thy  chaste  bride  the  wondrous  story  tell, 
The  woes,  the  horrors,  and  the  laws  of  hell.' 

"  Thus  while  she  spoke,  in  swarms  hell's  empress 
brings 

Daughters  and  wives  of  heroes  and  of  kings  ; 
Thick,  and  more  thick,  they  gather  round  the  blood, 
Ghost  throng'd  on  ghost  (a  dire  assembly)  stood! 
Dauntless  my  sword  1  seize  :  the  airy  crew, 
Swift  as  it  flash'd  along  the  gloom,  withdrew ; 
Then  shade  to  shade  in  mutual  forms  succeeds, 
Her  race  recounts,  and  their  illustrious  deeds. 

"  Tyro  began :  whom  great  Salmoneus  bred  ; 
The  royal  partner  of  fam'd  Cretheus'  bed. 
For  fair  Enipeus,  as  from  fruitful  urns 
He  pours  his  watery  store ;  the  virgin  burns  ; 
Smooth  flows  the  gentle  stream  with  wanton  pride, 
And  in  soft  mazes  rolls  a  silver  tide. 
As  on  his  banks  the  maid  enamour'd  roves, 
The  monarch  of  the  deep  beholds  and  loves  ; 
In  her  Enipeus'  form  and  borrow 'd  charms, 
The  amorous  god  descends  into  her  arms  : 
Around,  a  spacious  arch  of  waves  he  throws, 
And  high  in  air  the  liquid  mountain  rose; 


206 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


Thus  in  surrounding  floods  conceal'd  he  proves 
The  pleasing  transport,  and  completes  his  loves. 
Then  softly  sighing,  he  the  fair  address'd, 
And  as  he  spoke  her  tender  hand  he  press'd. 
'  Hail,  happy  nymph !  no  vulgar  births  are  ow'd 
To  the  prolific  raptures  of  a  god  : 
Lo  !  when  nine  times  the  moon  renews  her  horn, 
Two  brother  heroes  shall  from  thee  be  born ; 
Thy  early  care  the  future  worthies  claim, 
To  point  them  to  the  arduous  paths  of  fame  ; 
But  in  thy  breast  th'  important  truth  conceal, 
Nor  dare  the  secret  of  a  god  reveal : 
For  know,  thou  Neptune  view'st !  and  at  my  nod 
Earth  trembles,  and  the  waves  confess  their  god.' 

"  He  added  not,  but  mounting  spurn'd  the  plain, 
Then  plung'd  into  the  chambers  of  the  main. 

"Now  in  the  time's  full  process  forth  she  brings 
Jove's  dread  vicegerents,  in  two  future  kings; 
O'er  proud  Iolcos  Pelias  stretch'd  his  reign, 
And  godlike  Neleus  rul'd  the  Pylian  plain  : 
Then  fruitful,  to  her  Cretheus'  royal  bed 
She  gallant  Pheres  and  fam'd  iEson  bred : 
From  the  same  fountain  Amythaon  rose, 
Pleas'd  with  the  din  of  war,  and  noble  shout  of  foes. 

"  There  mov'd  Antiope  with  haughty  charms, 
Who  bless'd  th'  almighty  thunderer  in  her  arms : 
Hence  sprung  Amphion,  hence  brave  Zethus  came, 
Founders  of  Thebes,  and  men  of  mighty  name ; 
Though  bold  in  open  field,  they  yet  surround 
The  town  with  walls,  and  mound  inject  on  mound  ; 
Here  ramparts  stood,  there  towers  rose  high  in  air, 
And  here  through  seven  wide  portals  rush'd  the  war. 

"  There  with  soft  step  the  fair  Alcmena  trod, 
Who  bore  Alcides  to  the  thundering  god  ; 
And  iVlegara,  who  charm'd  the  son  of  Jove, 
And  soften'd  his  stern  soul  to  tender  love. 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


207 


"  Sullen  and  sour  with  discontented  mien 
Jocasta  frown'd,  th'  incestuous  Theban  queen ; 
With  her  own  son  she  join'd  in  nuptial  bands, 
Though  father's  b'ood  imbrued  his  murderous  hands: 
The  gods  and  men  the  dire  offence  detest, 
The  gods  with  all  their  furies  rend  his  breast: 
In  lofty  Thebes  he  wore  th*  imperial  crown, 
A  pompous  wretch  !  accurs'd  upon  a  throne. 
The  wife  self-murder'd  from  a  beam  depends, 
And  her  foul  soul  to  blackest  hell  descends ; 
Thence  to  her  son  the  choicest  plagues  she  brings, 
And  the  fiends  haunt  him  with  a  thousand  stings. 

u  And  now  the  beauteous  Chloris  I  descry, 
A  lovely  shade,  Amphion's  youngest  joy  ! 
With  gifts  unnumber'd  Neleus  sought  her  arms, 
Nor  paid  too  dearly  for  unequali'd  charms; 
Great  in  Orchomenos,  in  Pylos  great, 
He  sway'd  the  sceptre  with  imperial  state. 
Three  gallant  sons  the  joyful  monarch  told, 
Sage  Nestor,  Periclimenus  the  bold, 
And  Chromius  last;  but  of  the  softer  race, 
One  nymph  alone,  a  miracle  of  grace. 
Kings  on  their  thrones  for  lovely  Pero  burn, 
The  sire  denies,  and  kings  rejected  mourn. 
To  him  alone  the  beauteous  prize  he  yields, 
Whose  arm  should  ravish  from  Phylacian  fields 
The  herds  of  lphyclus,  detain'd  in  wrong; 
Wild,  furious  herds,  unconquerably  strong! 
This  dares  a  seer,  but  nought  the  seer  prevails, 
In  beauty's  cause  illustriously  he  fails  ; 
Twelve  moons  the  foe  the  captive  youth  detains 
In  painful  dungeons,  and  coercive  chains; 
The  foe  at  last,  from  durance  where  he  lay, 
His  art  revereing,  gave  him  back  to  day ; 
Won  by  prophetic  knowledge,  to  fulfil 
The  steadfast  purpose  of  th'  almighty  will. 


208 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


"  With  graceful  port  advancing  now  I  spy'd 
Leda  the  fair,  the  godlike  Tyndar's  bride : 
Hence  Pollux  sprung,  who  wields  with  furious  sway 
The  deathful  gauntlet,  matchless  in  the  fray : 
And  Castor,  glorious  on  th'  embattled  plain 
Curbs  the  proud  steed,  reluctant  to  the  rein: 
By  turns  they  visit  this  ethereal  sky, 
And  live  alternate,  and  alternate  die: 
In  hell  beneath,  oh  earth,  in  heaven  above, 
Reign  the  twin-gods,  the  favourite  sons  of  Jove. 

"  There  Ephimedia  trod  the  gloomy  plain, 
Who  charm'd  the  monarch  of  the  boundless  main ; 
Hence  Ephialtes,  hence  stern  Otus  sprung, 
More  fierce  than  giants,  more  than  giants  strong  ; 
The  earth  o'erburden'd  groan'd  beneath  their  weight, 
None  but  Orion  e'er  surpass'd  their  height: 
The  wondrous  youths  had  scarce  nine  winters  told, 
When  high  in  air,  tremendous  to  behold, 
Nine  ells  aloft  they  rear'd  their  towering  head, 
And  full  nine  cubits  broad  their  shoulders  spread. 
Proud  of  their  strength,  and  more  than  mortal  size, 
The  gods  they  challenge,  and  affect  the  skies; 
Heav'd  on  Olympus  tottering  Ossa  stood  ; 
On  Ossa.  Pelion  nods  with  all  his  wood : 
Such  were  they  youths  !  had  they  to  manhood  grown, 
Almighty  Jove  had  trembled  on  his  throne. 
But  ere  the  harvest  of  the  beard  began 
To  bristle  on  the  chin,  and  promise  man, 
His  shafts  Apollo  aim'd  ;  at  once  they  sound, 
And  stretch  the  giant-monsters  o'er  the  ground. 

"  There  mournful  Phaedra  with  sad  Procris  moves, 
Both  beauteous  shades,  both  hapless  in  their  loves ; 
And  near  them  walk'd,  with  solemn  pace  and  slow, 
Sad  Ariadne,  partner  of  their  wo  ; 
The  royal  Minos  Ariadne  bred, 
She  Theseus  lov'd  ;  from  Crete  with  Theseus  fled  ; 


Book  11.  THE    ODYSSEY.  209 


Swift  to  the  Dian  isle  the  hero  flies, 
And  towards  his  Athens  bears  the  lovely  prize ; 
There  Bacchus  with  fierce  rage  Diana  fires, 
The  goddess  aims  her  shaft,  the  nymph  expires. 

"  There  Clymene  and  Mera  I  behold  ;  ~i 
There  Eriphyle  weeps,  who  loosely  sold  > 
Her  lord,  her  honour,  for  the  lust  of  gold.  } 
But  should  I  all  recount,  the  night  would  fail, 
Unequal  to  the  melancholy  tale  ; 
And  all-composing  rest  my  nature  craves, 
Here  in  the  court  or  yonder  on  the  waves: 
In  you  1  trust,  and  in  the  heavenly  pow'rs, 
To  land  Ulysses  on  his  native  shores." 

He  ceas'd  ;  but  left  so  charming  on  their  ear 
His  voice,  that  listening  still  they  seem'd  to  hear ; 
Till  rising  up,  Arete  silence  broke, 
Stretch'd  out  her  snowy  hand,  and  thus  she  spoke: 

"  What  wendrous  man  heaven  sends  us  in  our  guest ! 
Through  all  his  woes  the  hero  shines  confess'd  ; 
His  comely  port,  his  ample  frame,  express 
A  manly  air,  majestic  in  distress. 
He,  as  my  guest,  is  my  peculiar  care; 
You  share  the  pleasure. — then  in  bounty  share; 
To  worth  in  misery,  a  reverence  pay, 
And  with  a  generous  hand  reward  his  stay ; 
For  since  kind  heaven  with  wealth  our  realm  has  bless'd, 
Give  it  to  heaven,  by  aiding  the  distress'd." 

Then  sage  Echeneus,  whose  grave  reverend  brow 
The  hand  of  time  had  silver'd  oJer  with  snow, 
Mature  in  wisdom  rose  :  "  Your  words  (he  cries) 
Demand  obedience,  for  your  words  are  wise. 
But  let  our  king  direct  the  glorious  way 
To  generous  acts  ;  our  part  is  to  obey.'' 

"  While  life  informs  these  limbs  (the  king  replied) 
Well  to  deserve,  be  all  my  cares  employ'd  : 
O 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


But  here  this  night  the  royal  guest  detain, 
Till  the  sun  flames  along  th'  ethereal  plain : 
Be  it  ray  task  to  send  with  ample  stores 
The  stranger  from  our  hospitable  shores : 
Tread  you  my  steps  !  'Tis  mine  to  lead  the  race, 
The  first  in  glory,  as  the  first  in  place." 

To  whom  the  prince :  "  This  night  with  joy  I  stay, 
O  monarch  great  in  virtue  as  in  sway  ! 
If  thou  the  circling  year  my  stay  control, 
To  raise  a  bounty  noble  as  thy  soul ; 
The  circling  year  1  wait,  with  ampler  stores 
And  fitter  pomp  to  hail  my  native  shores  : 
Then  by  my  realms  due  homage  would  be  paid ; 
For  wealthy  kings  are  loyally  obey'd  !'' 

"  O  king  for  such  thou  art,  and  sure  thy  blood 
Through  veins  (he  cried)  of  royal  fathers  flow'd  ; 
Unlike  those  vagrants  who  on  falsehood  live, 
Skill'd  in  smooth  tales,  and  artful  to  deceive ; 
Thy  better  soul  abhors  the  liar's  part, 
Wise  is  thy  voice,  and  noble  is  thy  heart. 
Thy  words  like  music  every  breast  control, 
Steal  through  the  ear,  and  win  upon  the  soul; 
Soft,  as  some  song  divine,  thy  story  flows, 
Nor  better  could  the  muse  record  thy  woes. 

"  But  say,  upon  the  dark  and  dismal  coast 
Saw'st  thou  the  worthies  of  the  Grecian  host; 
The  godlike  leaders  who,  in  battle  slain, 
Fell  before  Troy,  and  nobly  press'd  the  plain? 
And  lo  !  a  length  of  night  behind  remains, 
The  evening  stars  still  mount  th'  ethereal  plains. 
Thy  tale  with  raptures  1  could  hear  thee  tell, 
Thy  woes  on  earth,  the  wondrous  scenes  in  hell, 
Till  in  the  vault  of  heaven  the  stars  decay, 
And  the  sky  reddens  with  the  rising  day." 

"  O  worthy  of  the  power  the  gods  assign'd, 
(Ulysses  thus  replies)  a  king  in  mind  ! 


Book  11.  THE   ODYSSEY.  211 


Since  yet  the  early  hour  of  night  allows 
Time  for  discourse,  and  time  for  soft  repose, 
If  scenes  of  misery  can  entertain, 
Woes  I  unfold,  of  woes  a  dismal  train, 
Prepare  to  hear  of  murder  and  of  blood  ; 
Of  godlike  heroes  who  uninjur'd  stood 
Amidst  a  war  of  spears  in  foreign  lands, 
Yet  bled  at  home,  and  bled  by  female  hands. 

%i  Now  summon'd  Proserpine  to  hell's  black  hall 
The  heroine  shades  ;  they  vanish'd  at  her  call. 

<f  When  lo  !  advancM  the  forms  of  heroes  slain  } 
By  stern  Egysthus,  a  majestic  train,  > 
And  high  above  the  rest,  Atrides  press'd  the  plain ;  ) 
He  quaff'd  the  gore  ;  and  straight  his  soldier  knew, 
And  from  his  eyes  pour'd  down  the  tender  dew  ; 
His  arms  he  stretch'd  ;  his  arms  the  touch  deceive, 
Nor  in  the  fond  embrace,  embraces  give : 
His  substance  vanish'd,  and  his  strength  decay'd, 
Now  all  Atrides  is  an  empty  shade. 

"  Mov'd  at  the  sight,  I  for  a  space  resign'd 
To  soft  affliction  all  my  manly  mind ; 
At  last  with  tears — n  Oh  what  relentless  doom, 
Imperial  phantom,  bow'd  thee  to  the  tomb  1 
Say,  while  the  sea,  and  while  the  tempest  raves, 
Has  fate  oppressM  thee  in  the  roaring  waves, 
Or  nobly  seiz'd  thee  in  the  dire  alarms 
Of  war  and  slaughter,  and  the  clash  of  arms  V* 

"  The  ghost  returns  :  '  O  chief  of  humankind 
For  active  courage  and  a  patient  mind : 
Nor  while  the  sea,  nor  while  the  tempest  raves, 
Has  fate  oppressM  me  on  the  roaring  waves ; 
Nor  nobly  seiz'd  me  in  the  dire  alarms 
Of  war  and  slaughter,  and  the  clash  of  arms. 
Stabb'd  by  a  murderous  hand  Atrides  died, 
A  foul  adulterer,  and  a  faithless  bride ; 


212 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


E'en  in  my  mirth,  and  at  the  friendly  feast, 

O'er  the  full  bowl,  the  traitor  stabb'd  his  guest. 

Thus  by  the  gory  arm  of  slaughter  falls 

The  stately  ox,  and  bleeds  within  the  stalls. 

But  not  with  me  the  direful  murder  ends, 

These,  these  expir'd !  their  crime,  they  were  my  friends : 

Thick  as  the  boars,  which  some  luxurious  lord 

Kills  for  the  feast,  to  crown  the  nuptial  board. 

When  war  has  thunder'd  with  its  loudest  storms, 

Death  thou  hast  seen  in  all  her  ghastly  forms ; 

In  duel  met  her  on  the  listed  ground, 

When  hand  to  hand  they  wound  return  for  wound ; 

But  never  have  thy  eyes  astonish'd  view'd 

So  vile  a  deed,  so  dire  a  scene  of  blood. 

E'en  in  the  flow  of  joy,  when  now  the  bowl 

Glows  in  our  veins,  and  opens  every  soul, 

We  groan,  we  faint  ;  with  blood  the  dome  is  dyed, 

And  o'er  the  pavement  floats  the  dreadful  tide — 

Her  breast  all  gore,  with  lamentable  cries, 

The  bleeding  innocent  Cassandra  dies  ! 

Then  though  pale  death  froze  cold  in  every  vein, 

My  sword  1  strive  to  wield,  but  strive  in  vain ; 

Nor  did  my  traitress  wife  these  eyelids  close, 

Or  decently  in  death  my  limbs  compose. 

O  woman,  woman  1  when  to  ill  thy  mind 

Is  bent,  all  hell  contains  no  fouler  fiend : 

And  such  was  mine !  who  basely  plung'd  her  sword 

Through  the  fond  bosom  where  she  reign'd  ador'd! 

Alas  !  I  hop'd,  the  toils  of  war  o'ercome, 

To  meet  soft  quiet  and  repose  at  home : 

Delusive  hope  1  O  wife,  thy  deeds  disgrace 

The  perjur'd  sex,  and  blacken  all  the  race  ; 

And  should  posterity  one  virtuous  find, 

Name  Clytemnestra,  they  will  curse  the  kind.' 

1  O  injur'd  shade  (I  cry'd,)  what  mighty  woes 
To  thy  imperial  race  from  woman  rose  ! 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


By  woman  here  thou  treads't  this  mournful  strand, 
And  Greece  by  woman  lies  a  desert  land.' 

1  Warn'd  by  my  ills  beware  (the  shade  replies,) 
Nor  trust  the  sex  that  is  so  rarely  wise ; 
When  earnest  to  explore  thy  secret  breast, 
Unfold  some  trifle,  but  conceal  the  rest. 
But  in  thy  consort  cease  to  fear  a  foe, 
For  thee  she  feels  sincerity  of  wo : 
When  Troy  first  bled  beneath  the  Grecian  arms 
She  shone  unrivall'd  with  a  blaze  of  charms, 
Thy  infant  son  her  fragrant  bosom  press'd, 
Hung  at  her  knee,  or  wanton'd  at  her  breast ; 
But  now  the  years  a  numerous  train  have  ran  ; 
The  blooming  boy  is  ripen'd  into  man; 
Thy  eyes  shall  see  him  burn  with  noble  fire, 
The  sire  shall  bless  his  son,  the  son  his  sire : 
But  my  Orestes  never  met  these  eyes, 
Without  one  look  the  murder'd  father  dies  ; 
Then  from  a  wretched  friend  this  wisdom  learn, 
E'en  to  thy  queen  disguis'd,  unknown,  return  ; 
For  since  of  womankind  so  few  are  just, 
Think  all  are  false,  nor  e'en  the  faithful  trust. 

'  But  say,  resides  my  son  in  royal  port, 
In  rich  Orchomenos,  or  Sparta's  court  7 
Or  say,  in  Pyle?  for  yet  he  views  the  light, 
Nor  glides  a  phantom  through  the  realms  of  night.' 

"  Then  1  :  1  Thy  suit  is  vain,  nor  can  1  say 
If  yet  he  breathes  in  realms  of  cheerful  day  ; 
Or  pale  or  wan  beholds  these  nether  skies  : 
Truth  I  revere  ;  for  wisdom  never  lies.' 

"  Thus  in  a  tide  of  tears  our  sorrows  flow, 
And  adds  new  horror  to  the  realms  of  wo ; 
Till  side  by  side  along  the  dreary  coast 
Advanced  Achilles'  and  Patroclus'  ghost, 
A  friendly  pair  !  near  these  the  Pylian  stray'd, 
And  towering  Ajax,  an  illustrious  shade ! 


214 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


War  was  his  joy,  and  pleas'd  with  loud  alarms, 
None  but  Pelides  brighter  shone  in  arms. 

"  Through  the  thick  gloom  his  friend  Achilles  knew, 
And  as  he  speaks  the  tears  descend  in  dew  : 

1  Com'st  thou  alive  to  view  the  Stygian  bounds, 
Where  the  wan  spectres  walk  eternal  rounds ; 
Nor  fear'st  the  dark  and  dismal  waste  to  tread, 
Throng'd  with  pale  ghosts,  familiar  with  the  dead  1* 

u  To  whom  with  sighs:  1 1  pass  these  dreadful  gates 
To  seek  the  Theban,  and  consult  the  fates  : 
For  still  distress'd  1  rove  from  coast  to  coast, 
Lost  to  my  friends,  and  to  my  country  lost. 
But  sure  the  eye  of  time  beholds  no  name 
So  bless'd  as  thine  in  all  the  rolls  of  fame ; 
Alive  we  hail'd  thee  with  our  guardian  gods, 
And  dead,  thou  rul'st  a  king  in  these  abodes.' 

1  Talk  not  of  ruling,  in  this  dolorous  gloom, 
Nor  think  vain  words  (he  cried)  can  ease  my  doom. 
Rather  I'd  choose  laboriously  to  bear 
A  weight  of  woes,  and  breathe  the  vital  air, 
A  slave  to  some  poor  hind  that  toils  for  bread, 
Than  reign  the  sceptred  monarch  of  the  dead. 
But  say,  if  in  my  steps  my  son  proceeds, 
And  emulates  his  godlike  father's  deeds  1 
If  at  the  clash  of  arms,  and  shout  of  foes, 
Swells  his  bold  heart,  his  bosom  nobly  glows? 
Say  if  my  sire,  the  reverend  Peleus,  reigns 
Great  in  his  Pthia,  and  his  throne  maintains ; 
Or  weak  and  old,  my  youthful  arm  demands, 
To  fix  the  sceptre  steadfast  in  his  hands'? 
O  might  the  lamp  of  life  rekindled  burn, 
And  death  release  me  from  the  silent  urn  ! 
This  arm  that  thunder'd  o'er  the  Phrygian  plain, 
And  swell'd  the  ground  with  mountains  of  the  slain, 
Should  vindicate  my  injur' d  father's  fame, 
Crush  the  proud  rebel,  and  assert  his  claim.' 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


215 


{ Illustrious  shade  (I  cried)  of  Peleus'  fates 
No  circumstance  the  voice  of  fame  relates  : 
But  hear  with  pleas'd  attention  the  renown, 
The  wars  and  wisdom  of  thy  gallant  son : 
With  me  from  Scyros  to  the  field  of  fame 
Radiant  in  arms  the  hlooming  hero  came. 
When  Greece  assembled  all  her  hundred  states 
To  ripen  counsels,  and  decide  debates ; 
Heavens  !  how  he  charm'd  us  with  a  flow  of  sense, 
And  won  the  heart  with  manly  eloquence ! 
He  first  was  seen  of  all  the  peers  to  rise, 
The  third  in  wisdom,  where  they  all  were  wise ; 
But  when,  to  try  the  fortune  of  the  day, 
Host  mov'd  toward  host  in  terrible  array, 
Before  the  van,  impatient  for  the  fight, 
With  martial  port  he  strode,  and  stern  delight ; 
Heaps  strew'd  on  heaps  beneath  his  falchion  groan'd, 
And  monuments  of  dead  deform'd  the  ground. 
The  time  would  fail  should  I  in  order  tell 
What  foes  were  vanquish'd,  and  what  numbers  fell ; 
How,  lost  through  love,  Eurypylus  was  slain, 
And  round  him  bled  his  bold  Cetsan  train. 
To  Troy  no  hero  came  of  nobler  line, 
Or  if  of  nobler,  Memnon,  it  was  thine. 

1  When  Ilion  in  the  horse  receiv'd  her  doom, 
And  unseen  armies  ambush'd  in  its  womb; 
Greece  gave  her  latent  warriors  to  my  care, 
'Twas  mine  on  Troy  to  pour  th'  imprison'd  war : 
Then  when  the  boldest  bosom  beat  with  fear, 
When  the  stern  eyes  of  heroes  dropp'd  a  tear  ; 
Fierce  in  his  look  his  ardent  valour  glow'd, 
Flush'd  in  his  cheek,  or  sallied  in  his  blood ; 
Indignant  in  the  dark  recess  he  stands, 
Pants  for  the  battle,  and  the  war  demands ; 
His  voice  breath'd  death,  and  with  a  martial  air 
He  grasp'd  his  sword,  and  shook  his  glittering  spear. 


216 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


And  when  the  gods  our  arms  with  conquest  crown'd, 
When  Troy's  proud  bulwarks  smok'd  upon  the  ground, 
Greece,  to  reward  her  soldier's  gallant  toils, 
Heap'd  high  his  navy  with  unnumber'd  spoils. 

'  Thus  great  in  glory,  from  the  din  of  war 
Safe  he  return'd,  without  one  hostile  scar; 
Though  spears  in  iron  tempests  rai^d  around, 
Yet  innocent  they  play'd,  and  guiltless  of  a  wound.' 

"  While  yet  1  spoke,  the  shade  with  transport  glow'd. 
Rose  in  his  majesty,  and  nobler  trod  ; 
"With  haughty  stalk  he  sought  the  distant  glades 
Of  warrior  kings,  and  join'd  th'  illustrious  shades. 

"  Now  without  number  ghost  by  ghost  arose, 
All  wailing  with  unutterable  woes. 
Alone,  apart,  in  discontented  mood, 
A  gloomy  shade,  the  sullen  Ajax  stood; 
For  ever  sad,  with  proud  disdain  he  pin'd, 
And  the  lost  arms  for  ever  stung  his  mind  ; 
Though  to  the  contest  Thetis  gave  the  laws, 
And  Dallas,  by  the  Trojans  judg'd  the  cause. 
Oh  why  was  1  victorious  in  the  strife ; 
O  dear  bought  honour  with  so  brave  a  life  ! 
With  him  the  strength  of  war,  the  soldiers'  pride, 
Our  second  hope  to  great  Achilles,  died ! 
Touch'd  at  the  sight  from  tears  1  scarce  refrain, 
And  tender  sorrow  thrills  in  every  vein  ; 
Pensive  and  sad  1  stand,  at  length  accost 
With  accents  mild  th'  inexorable  ghost: 

1  Still  burns  thy  rage  ?  and  can  brave  souls  resent 
E'en  after  death  ?  Relent,  great  shade  relent ! 
Perish  those  arms  which  by  the  gods'  decree 
Accurs'd  our  army  with  the  loss  of  thee  ! 
With  thee  we  fell ;  Greece  wept  thy  hapless  fates  ; 
And  shook  astonish'd  through  her  hundred  states ; 
Not  more,  when  great  Achilles  press'd  the  ground, 
And  breath'd  his  manly  spirit  through  the  wound. 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


217 


O  deem  thy  fall  not  ow'd  to  man's  decree, 
Jove  hated  Greece,  and  punish'd  Greece  in  thee  ! 
Turn  then,  O  peaceful  turn,  thy  wrath  control, 
And  calm  the  raging  tempest  of  thy  soul.' 

"  While  yet  1  speak,  the  shade  disdains  to  stay, 
In  silence  turns,  and  sullen  stalks  away. 

"  Touch'd  at  his  sour  retreat  through  deepest  night, 
Through  hell's  black  bounds  I  had  pursu'd  his  flight, 
And  forc'd  the  stubborn  spectre  to  reply  ; 
But  wondrous  visions  drew  my  curious  eye. 
High  on  a  throne,  tremendous  to  behold, 
Stern  Minos  waves  a  mace  of  burnish'd  gold ; 
Around  ten  thousand  thousand  spectres  stand 
Through  the  wide  dome  of  Dis,  a  trembling  band. 
Still  as  they  plead,  the  fatal  lots  he  rolls, 
Absolves  the  just,  and  dooms  the  guilty  souls. 

"  There  huge  Orion,  of  portentous  size, 
Swift  through  the  gloom  a  giant  hunter  flies  ; 
A  pond'rous  mace  of  brass  with  direful  sway 
Aloft  he  whirls,  to  crush  the  savage  prey  ; 
Stern  beasts  in  trains  that  by  his  truncheon  fell, 
JN"ow  grisly  forms,  shoot  o'er  the  lawns  of  hell. 

11  There  Tityus  large  and  long,  in  fetters  bound, 
O'erspread  nine  acres  of  infernal  ground  ; 
Two  ravenous  vultures,  furious  for  their  food, 
Scream'd  o'er  the  fiend,  and  riot  in  his  blood, 
Incessant  gore  the  liver  in  his  breast, 
The  immortal  liver  grows,  and  gives  th'  immortal  feast; 
For  as  o'er  Panope's  enamell'd  plains 
Latona  journey 'd  to  the  Pythian  fanes, 
With  haughty  love  th*  audacious  monster  strove 
To  force  the  goddess,  and  to  rival  Jove. 

"  There  Tantalus  along  the  Stygian  bounds 
Pours  out  deep  groans ;  (with  groans  all  hell  resounds) 
E'en  in  the  circling  floods  refreshment  craves, 
And  pines  with  thirst  amidst  a  sea  of  waves ; 


218 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  11. 


When  to  the  water  he  his  lip  applies, 
Back  from  his  lip  the  treacherous  water  flies. 
Above,  beneath,  around  his  hapless  head, 
Trees  of  all  kinds  delicious  fruitage  spread  ; 
There  figs  sky-dyed,  a  purple  hue  disclose, 
Green  looks  the  olive,  the  pomegranate  glows, 
There  dangling  pears  exalted  scents  unfold, 
And  yellow  apples  ripen  into  gold  ; 
The  fruit  he  strives  to  seize:  but  blasts  arise, 
Toss  it  on  high,  and  whirl  it  to  the  skies. 

" 1  turn'd  my  eye,  and  as  I  turn'd  surveyM 
A  mournful  vision  !  the  Sisyphian  shade  ; 
With  many  a  weary  step,  and  many  a  groan, 
Up  the  high  hill  he  heaves  a  huge  round  stone ; 
The  huge  round  stone,  resulting  with  a  bound, 
Thunders  impetuous  down,  and  smokes  along  the 
Again  the  restless  orb  his  toil  renews,  [ground. 
Dust  mounts  in  clouds,  and  sweat  descends  in  dews. 

"  Now  I  the  strength  of  Hercules  behold, 
A  towering  spectre  of  gigantic  mould, 
A  shadowy  form  !  for  high  in  heaven's  abodes 
Himself  resides,  a  god  among  the  gods ; 
There  in  the  bright  assemblies  of  the  skies, 
He  nectar  quaffs,  and  Hebe  crowns  his  joys. 
Here  hovering  ghosts,  like  fowl,  his  shade  surround, 
And  clang  their  pinions  with  terrific  sound ; 
Gloomy  as  night  he  stands,  in  act  to  throw 
The  aerial  arrow  from  the  twanging  bow. 
Around  his  breast  a  wondrous  zone  is  roll'd, 
Where  woodland  monsters  grin  in  fretted  gold: 
There  sullen  lions  sternly  seem  to  roar, 
The  bear  to  growl,  to  foam  the  tusky  boar; 
There  war  and  havoc  and  destruction  stood, 
And  vengeful  murder  red  with  human  blood. 
Thus  terribly  adorn'd  the  figures  shine, 
Inimitably  wrought  with  skill  divine. 


Book  11. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


219 


The  mighty  ghost  advanc'd  with  awful  look, 
And,  turning  his  grim  visage,  sternly  spoke : 
1 0  exercis'd  in  grief!  by  arts  refin'd  ! 

0  taught  to  bear  the  wrongs  of  base  mankind  ! 
Such,  such  was  1 !  still  toss'd  from  care  to  care, 
While  in  your  world  1  drew  the  vital  air ! 
E'en  I  who  from  the  Lord  of  thunders  rose, 
Bore  toils  and  dangers,  and  a  weight  of  woes ; 
To  a  base  monarch  still  a  slave  conhVd, 
(The  hardest  bondage  to  a  generous  mind !) 
Down  to  these  worlds  I  trod  the  dismal  way, 
And  dragg'd  the  three-mouth'd  dog  to  upper  day ; 
E'en  hell  1  conquer'd,  through  the  friendly  aid 
Of  Maia's  offspring  and  the  martial  maid.' 

"Thus  he,  nor  deign'd  for  our  reply  to  stay, 
But  turning  stalk'd  with  giant  strides  away. 

"  Curious  to  view  the  kings  of  ancient  days, 
The  mighty  dead  that  live  in  endless  praise, 
Resolv'd  I  stand  ;  and  haply  had  survey'd 
The  godlike  Theseus,  and  Pirithous'  shade; 
But  swarms  of  spectres  rose  from  deepest  hell, 
With  bloodless  visage,  and  with  hideous  yell, 
They  scream,  they  shriek  ;  sad  groans  and  dismal  sounds 
Stun  my  scar'd  ears,  sad  pierce  hell's  utmost  bounds. 
No  more  my  heart  the  dismal  din  sustains, 
And  my  cold  blood  hangs  shivering  in  my  veins ; 
Lest  Gorgon  rising  from  th'  infernal  lakes, 
With  horrors  arm'jl,  and  curls  of  hissing  snakes, 
Should  fix  me,  stiffen'd  at  the  monstrous  sight, 
A  stony  image,  in  eternal  night ! 
Straight  from  the  direful  coast  to  purer  air 

1  speed  my  flight,  and  to  my  mates  repair. 

My  mates  ascend  the  ship  ;  they  strike  their  oars  ; 
The  mountains  lessen,  and  retreat  the  shores ; 
Swift  o'er  the  waves  we  fly;  the  freshening  gales 
Sing  through  the  shrouds,  and  stretch  the  swelling  sails.  " 


BOOK  XII. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

THE  SIRENS,  S<?YLLA  AND  CHARYBDIS. 

HE  relates  how,  after  his  return  from  the  shades,  he  was  sent  by 
Circe  on  his  voyage,  by  the  coast  of  the  Sirens,  and  by  the  strait 
of  Scylla  and  Charybdis  ;  the  manner  in  which  he  escnped 
those  dangers:  how,  being  cast  on  the  island  Trinacria,  his 
companions  destroyed  the  oxen  of  the  sun  ;  the  vengeance  that 
followed  ;  how  all  perished  by  shipwreck  except  himself,  who, 
swimming  on  the  mast  of  the  ship,  arrived  on  the  island  of  Ca- 
lypso.  With  which  his  narration  concludes. 

"  Thus  o'er  the  rolling  surge  the  vessel  flies, 
Till  from  the  waves  th*  iEaean  hills  arise. 
Here  the  gay  Morn  resides  in  radiant  bow'rs, 
Here  keeps  her  revels  with  the  dancing  Hours ; 
Here  Phoebus,  rising  in  th*  ethereal  way, 
Through  heaven's  bright  portals  pours  the  beamy  day. 
At  once  we  fix  our  halsers  on  the  land, 
At  once  descend,  and  press  the  desert  sand  ; 
There,  worn  and  wasted,  lose  our  cares  in  sleep, 
To  the  hoarse  murmurs  of  the  rolling  deep. 

"  Soon  as  the  mom  restor'd  the  day,  we  pay'd 
Sepulchral  honours  to  Elpenor's  shade. 


222 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  12. 


Now  by  the  axe  the  rushing  ferest  bends, 
And  the  huge  pile  along  the  shore  ascends. 
Around  we  stand,  a  melancholy  train, 
And  a  loud  groan  re-echoes  from  the  main. 
Fierce  o'er  the  pyre,  by  fanning  breezes  spread, 
The  hungry  flame  devours  the  silent  dead. 
A  rising  tomb,  the  silent  dead  to  grace, 
Fast  by  the  roarings  of  the  main  we  place ; 
The  rising  tomb  a  lofty  column  bore, 
And  high  above  it  rose  the  tapering  oar. 

"  Meantime  the  goddess  our  return  survey'd 
From  the  pale  ghosts,  and  hell's  tremendous  shade. 
Swift  she  descends  :  a  train  of  nymphs  divine 
Bear  the  rich  viands  and  the  generous  wine. 
In  act  to  speak,  the  power  of  magic  stands, 
And  graceful  thus  accosts  the  listening  bands  : 

1  O  sons  of  wo  !  decreed  by  adverse  fates 
Alive  to  pass  through  hell's  eternal  gates  ! 
All,  soon  or  late,  are  doom'd  that  path  to  tread ; 
More  wretched  you,  twice  number'd  with  the  dead  ! 
This  day  adjourn  your  cares  ;  exalt  your  souls, 
Indulge  the  taste,  and  drain  the  sparkling  bowls; 
And  when  the  morn  unveils  her  saffron  ray, 
Spread  your  broad  sails,  and  plough  the  liquid  way  : 
Lo  1  this  night,  your  faithful  guide,  explain 
Your  woes  by  land,  your  dangers  on  the  main.' 

"  The  goddess  spoke ;  in  feast  we  waste  the  day, 
Till  Phoebus  downward  plung'd  his  burning  ray  ; 
Then  sable  night  ascends,  and  balmy  rest 
Seals  every  eye.  and  calms  the  troubled  breast. 
Then,  curious,  she  commands  me  to  relate 
The  dreadful  scenes  of  Pluto's  dreary  state ; 
She  sat  in  silence  while  the  tale  I  tell, 
The  wondrous  visions,  and  the  laws  of  hell. 

"  Then  thus  :  1  The  lot  of  man  the  gods  dispose  ; 
These  ills  are  past ;  now  hear  thy  future  woes. 


Book  12. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


223 


O  prince  attend ;  some  favouring  power  be  kind, 
And  print  th*  important  story  on  thy  mind  ! 

1  Next,  where  the  Sirens  dwell,  you  plough  the  seas; 
Their  song  is  death,  and  makes  destruction  please. 
Unbless'd  the  man,  whose  music  wins  to  stay 
.Nigh  the  curs'd  shore,  and  listen  to  the  lay ; 
No  more  that  wretch  shall  view  the  joys  of  life, 
His  blooming  offspring,  or  his  beauteous  wife ! 
In  verdant  meads  they  sport,  and  wide  around 
Lie  human  bones,  that  whiten  all  the  ground  ; 
The  ground  polluted  floats  with  human  gore, 
And  human  carnage  taints  the  dreadful  shore. 
Fly  swift  the  dangerous  coast ;  let  every  ear 
Be  stopp'd  against  the  song  :  'tis  death  to  hear! 
Firm  to  the  mast  with  chains  thyself  be  bound, 
Nor  trust  thy  virtue  to  the  enchanting  sound. 
If,  mad  with  transport,  freedom  thou  demand, 
Be  every  fetter  strain'd,  and  added  band  to  band.  ' 

c  These  seas  o'erpass'd,  be  wise  !  but  1  refrain 
To  mark  distinct  thy  passage  o'er  the  main  : 
New  horrors  rise  !  let  prudence  be  thy  guide, 
And  guard  thy  various  passage  through  the  tide. 

1  High  o'er  the  main  two  rocks  exalt  their  brow, 
The  boiling  billows  thundering  roll  below ; 
Through  the  vast  waves  the  dreadful  wonders  move, 
Hence  nam'd  Erratic  by  the  gods  above. 
No  bird  of  air,  no  dove  of  swiftest  wing, 
That  bears  ambrosia  to  th'  ethereal  king, 
Shuns  the  dire  rocks  :  in  vain  she  cuts  the  skies, 
The  dire  rocks  meet,  and  crush  her  as  she  flies. 
Not  the  fleet  bark,  when  prosperous  breezes  play, 
Ploughs  o'er  that  roaring  surge  its  desperate  way ; 
O'erwhelm'd  it  sinks  :  while  round  a  smoke  expires, 
And  the  waves  flashing  seem  to  burn  with  fires. 
Scarce  the  fam'd  Argo  pass'd  these  raging  floods, 
The  sacred  Argo,  fill'd  with  demigods  ! 


224 


THE    ODYSSEY.  Book  12. 


E'en  she  had  sunk,  but  Jove's  imperial  bride 
Wing'd  her  fleet  sail,  and  push'd  her  o'er  the  tide. 

'  High  in  the  air  the  rock  its  summit  shrouds 
In  brooding  tempests,  and  in  rolling  clouds ; 
Loud  storms  around  and  mist  eternal  rise, 
Beat  its  bleak  brow,  and  intercept  the  skies. 
"When  all  the  broad  expansion,  bright  with  day, 
Glows  with  the  autumnal  or  the  summer  ray, 
The  summer  and  the  autumn  glow  in  vain, 
The  sky  for  ever  lours,  for  ever  clouds  remain. 
Impervious  to  the  step  of  man  it  stands, 
Though  borne  by  twenty  feet,  though  arm'd  with  twen- 
Smooth  as  the  polish  of  the  mirror  rise        [ty  hands  j 
The  slippery  sides,  and  shoot  into  the  skies. 
Full  in  the  centre  of  this  rock  display 'd, 
A  yawning  cavern  casts  a  dreadful  shade  : 
Nor  the  fleet  arrow  from  the  twanging  bow, 
Sent  with  full  force,  could  reach  the  depth  below. 
Wide  to  the  west  the  horrid  gulf  extends, 
And  the  dire  passage  down  to  hell  descends, 
O  fly  the  dreadful  sight !  expand  thy  sails, 
Ply  the  strong  oar,  and  catch  the  nimble  gales: 
Here  Scylla  bellows  from  her  dire  abodes, 
Tremendous  pest !  abhorr'd  by  man  and  gods  ! 
Hideous  her  voice,  and  with  less  terrors  roar 
The  whelps  of  lions  in  the  midnight  hour. 
Twelve  feet,  deform'd  and  foul,  the  fiend  dispreads ; 
Six  horrid  necks  she  rears,  and  six  terrific  heads; 
Her  jaws  grin  dreadful  with  three  rows  of  teeth; 
Jaggy  they  stand,  the  gaping  den  of  death  ; 
Her  parts  obscene  the  raging  billows  hide  ; 
Her  bosom  terribly  o'er  looks  the  tide. 
When  stung  with  hunger  she  embroils  the  flood, 
The  sea-dog  and  the  dolphin  are  her  food  ; 
She  makes  the  huge  leviathan  her  prey, 
And  all  the  monsters  of  the  wat'ry  way ; 


Book  12. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


225 


The  swiftest  racer  of  the  azure  plain 

Here  fills  her  sails  and  spreads  her  oars  in  vain  ; 

Fell  Scylla  rises,  in  her  fury  roars, 

At  once  six  mouths  expands,  at  once  six  men  devours. 

1  Close  by,  a  rock  of  less  enormous  height 
Breaks  the  wild  waves,  and  forms  a  dang'rous  strait ; 
Full  on  its  crown  a  fig's  green  branches  rise, 
And  shoot  a  leafy  forest  to  the  skies ; 
Beneath,  Charybdis  holds  her  boisterous  reign 
'Midst  roaring  whirlpools,  and  absorbs  the  main; 
Thrice  in  her  gulfs  the  boiling  seas  subside, 
Thrice  in  dire  thunders  she  refunds  the  tide. 
Oh  if  thy  vessel  plough  the  direful  waves 
When  seas  retreating  roar  within  her  caves, 
Ye  perish  all !  though  he  who  rules  the  main 
Lends  his  strong  aid,  his  aid  he  lends  in  vain. 
Ah  shun  the  horrid  gulf!  by  Scylla  fly, 
'Tis  better  six  to  lose,  than  all  to  die.' 

"  I  then  :  *  O  nymph  propitious  to  my  pray'r, 
Goddess  divine,  my  guardian  power,  declare, 
Is  the  foul  fiend  from  human  vengeance  freed  1 
Or  if  I  rise  in  arms,  can  Scylla  bleed  V 

"  Then  she  :  1  O  worn  by  toils,  O  broke  in  fight, 
Still  are  new  toils  and  war  thy  dire  delight  ? 
Will  martial  flames  for  ever  fire  thy  mind, 
And  never,  never  be  to  heaven  resign'd  1 
How  vain  thy  efforts  to  avenge  the  wrong  1 
Deathless  the  pest !  impenetrably  strong  I 
Furious  and  fell,  tremendous  to  behold  ! 
E'en  with  a  look  she  withers  all  the  bold ! 
She  mocks  the  weak  attempts  of  human  might  ; 
O  fly  her  rage !  thy  conquest  is  thy  flight. 
If  but  to  seize  thy  arms  thou  make  delay,  } 
Again  the  fury  vindicates  her  prey,  > 
Her  six  mouths  yawn,  and  six  are  snatch'd  away.  ) 
P 


226 


THE  ODTSSEY. 


Book  12. 


From  her  foul  womb  Cratseis  gave  to  air 
This  dreadful  pest !  To  her  direct  thy  pray'r, 
To  curb  the  monster  in  her  dire  abodes, 
And  guard  thee  through  the  tumult  of  the  floods. 
Thence  to  Trinacria's  shore  you  bend  your  way, 
Where  graze  thy  herds,  illustrious  source  of  day  ! 
Seven  herds,  seven  flocks,  enrich  the  sacred  plains, 
Each  herd,  each  flock,  full  fifty  heads  contains ; 
The  wondrous  kind  a  length  of  age  survey, 
By  breed  increase  not,  nor  by  death  decay. 
Two  sister  goddesses  possess  the  plain, 
The  constant  guardians  of  the  woolly  train : 
Lampetie  fair,  and  Phaethusa  young, 
From  Phoebus  and  the  bright  Nesera  sprung. 
Here  watchful  o'er  the  flocks,  in  shady  bowers 
And  flowery  meads  they  waste  the  joyous  hours. 
Rob  not  the  god  !  and  so  propitious  gales 
Attend  thy  voyage,  and  impel  thy  sails ; 
But  if  thy  impious  hands  the  flocks  destroy, 
The  gods,  the  gods  avenge  it,  and  ye  die  ! 
'Tis  thine  alone  (thy  friends  and  navy  lost) 
Through  tedious  toils  to  view  thy  native  coast.' 

"  She  ceas'd  :  and  now  arose  the  morning  ray  ; 
Swift  to  her  dome  the  goddess  held  her  way. 
Then  to  my  mates  I  measur'd  back  the  plain, 
Climb'd  the  tall  bark,  and  rush'd  into  the  main  ; 
Then  bending  to  the  stroke,  their  oars  they  drew 
To  their  broad  breasts,  and  swift  the  galley  flew. 
Up  sprung  a  brisker  breeze  :  with  freshening  gales 
The  friendly  goddess  stretch'd  the  swelling  sails : 
We  drop  our  oars ;  at  ease  the  pilot  guides  j 
The  vessel  light  along  the  level  glides. 
When  rising  sad  and  slow,  with  pensive  look, 
Thus  to  the  melancholy  train  I  spoke  : 

1  O  friends,  oh  ever  partners  of  my  woes, 
Attend  while  I  what  heaven  foredooms  disclose  : 


Book  12.  THE  ODYSSEY. 


227 


Hear  all !  fate  hangs  o'er  all !  on  you  it  lies 
To  live,  or  perish  ;  to  be  safe,  be  wise  ! 

1 In  flowery  meads  the  sportive  Sirens  play, 
Touch  the  soft  lyre,  and  tune  the  vocal  lay ; 
Me,  me  alone,  with  fetters  firmly  bound, 
The  gods  allow  to  hear  the  dangerous  sound. 
Hear  and  obey  :  if  freedom  I  demand, 
Be  every  fetter  strain'd,  be  added  band  lo  band.' 

"  While  yet  I  speak  the  winged  galley  flies, 
And  lo !  the  Siren  shores  like  mists  arise. 
Sunk  were  at  once  the  winds ;  the  air  above, 
And  waves  below,  at  once  forgot  to  move  ! 
Some  daemon  calm'd  the  air,  and  smooth'd  the  deep, 
Hush'd  the  loud  winds,  and  charm'd  the  waves  to  sleep. 
Now  every  sail  we  furl,  each  oar  we  ply  j 
Lash'd  by  the  stroke  the  frothy  waters  fly. 
The  ductile  wax  with  busy  hands  I  mould, 
And  cleft  in  fragments,  and  the  fragments  roll'd ; 
Th'  aerial  region  now  grew  warm  with  day, 
The  wax  dissolv'd  beneath  the  burning  ray ; 
Then  every  ear  I  barred  against  the  strain, 
And  from  excess  of  frenzy  lock'd  the  brain. 
Now  round  the  mast  my  mates  the  fetters  roll'd, 
And  bound  me  limb  by  limb,  with  fold  on  fold. 
Then  bending  to  the  stroke,  the  active  train 
Plunge  all  at  once  their  oars,  and  cleave  the  main. 

"  While  to  the  shore  the  rapid  vessel  flies, 
Our  swift  approach  the  Siren  quire  descries ; 
Celestial  music  warbles  from  their  tongue, 
And  thus  the  sweet  deluders  tune  the  song : 

'  O  stay,  O  pride  of  Greece  !  Ulysses,  stay ! 
O  cease  thy  course,  and  listen  to  our  lay  ! 
Bless'd  is  the  man  ordain'd  our  voice  to  hear, 
The  song  instructs  the  soul,  and  charms  the  ear. 
Approach  !  thy  soul  shall  into  raptures  rise  ! 
Approach !  and  learn  new  wisdom  from  the  wise ! 


228 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  12. 


We  know  whate'er  the  kings  of  mighty  name 
Achiev'd  at  Ilion  in  the  field  of  fame  ; 
Whate'er  beneath  the  sun's  bright  journey  lies. 

0  stay,  and  learn  new  wisdom  from  the  wise!' 

"  Thus  the  sweet  charmers  warbled  o'er  the  main ; 
My  soul  takes  wing  to  meet  the  heavenly  strain  j 

1  give  the  sign,  and  struggle  to  be  free : 
Swift  row  my  mates,  and  shoot  along  the  sea  ! 
New  chains  they  add,  and  rapid  urge  the  way, 
Till,  dying  off,  the  distant  sounds  decay  : 

Then  scudding  swiftly  from  the  dangerous  ground, 
The  deafen'd  ear  unlock'd,  the  chains  unbound. 

"  Now  all  at  once  tremendous  scenes  unfold ; 
Thunder'd  the  deeps,  the  smoking  billows  roll'd  ! 
Tumultuous  waves  embroil'd  the  bellowing  flood  : 
All  trembling,  deafen'd,  and  aghast  we  stood  ! 
No  more  the  vessel  plough'd  the  dreadful  wave, 
Fear  seiz'd  the  mighty,  and  unnerv'd  the  brave  ; 
Each  dropp'd  his  oar :  but  swift  from  man  to  man 
With  look  serene  I  turn'd,  and  thus  began : 
<  O  friends  !  Oh  often  tried  in  adverse  storms ! 
With  ills  familiar  in  more  dreadful  forms  ! 
Deep  in  the  dire  Cyclopean  den  you  lay, 
Yet  safe  return' d — Ulysses  led  the  way. 
Learn  courage  hence !  and  in  my  care  confide  : 
Lo !  still  the  same  Ulysses  is  your  guide  1 
Attend  my  words  !  your  oars  incessant  ply ; 
Strain  every  nerve,  and  bid  the  vessel  fly. 
If  from  yon  justling  rocks  and  wavy  war 
Jove  safety  grants,  he  grants  it  to  your  care. 
And  thou  whose  guiding  hand  directs  our  way, 
Pilot,  attentive  listen  and  obey ; 
Bear  wide  thy  course,  nor  plough  those  angry  waves 
Where  rolls  yon  smoke,  yon  tumbling  ocean  raves : 
Steer  by  the  higher  rock  ;  lest  whirl'd  around 
We  sink>  beneath  the  circling  eddy  drown'd.' 


Book  12.  THE   ODYSSEY.  229 


"  While  yet  I  speak,  at  once  their  oars  they  seize, 
Stretch  to  the  stroke,  and  brush  the  working  seas. 
Cautious  the  name  of  Scylla  I  suppress'd  ; 
That  dreadful  sound  had  chill'd  the  boldest  breast. 

"  Meantime,  forgetful  of  the  voice  divine, 
All  dreadful  bright  my  limbs  in  armour  shine ; 
High  on  the  deck  I  take  my  dangerous  stand, 
Two  glittering  javelins  lighten  in  my  hand  ; 
Prepar'd  to  whirl  the  whizzing  spear  I  stay, 
Till  the  fell  fiend  arise  to  seize  her  prey. 
Around  the  dungeon,  studious  to  behold 
The  hideous  pest,  my  labouring  eyes  I  roll'd; 
In  vain  !  the  dismal  dungeon,  dark  as  night. 
Veils  the  dire  monster,  and  confounds  the  sight. 

"  Now  through  the  rocks,  appall' d  with  deep  dismay, 
We  bend  our  course,  and  stem  the  desperate  way ; 
Dire  Scylla  there  a  scene  of  horror  forms, 
And  here  Chary bdis  fills  the  deep  with  storms, 
When  the  tide  rushes  from  her  rumbling  caves 
The  rough  rock  roars;  tumultuous  boil  the  waves; 
They  toss,  they  foam,  a  wild  confusion  raise, 
Like  waters  bubbling  o'er  the  fiery  blaze ; 
Eternal  mists  obscure  th'  aerial  plain, 
And  high  above  the  rock  she  spouts  the  main ! 
When  in  her  gulfs  the  rushing  sea  subsides, 
She  drains  the  ocean  with  the  refluent  tides: 
The  rock  rebellows  with  a  thund'ring  sound  ; 
Deep,  wondrous  deep  below,  appears  the  ground. 

"  Struck  with  despair,  with  trembling  hearts  we  view'd 
The  yawning  dungeon,  and  the  tumbling  flood ; 
When  lo!  fierce  Scylla  stoop'd  to  seize  her  prey, 
Stretch'd  her  dire  jaws,  and  swept  six  men  away ; 
Chiefs  of  renown  !  loud  echoing  shrieks  arise  ; 
I  turn  and  view  them  quivering  in  the  skies ; 
They  call,  and  aid  with  outstretch'd  arms  implore  ; 
In  vain  they  call !  those  arms  are  stretch'd  no  more. 


230 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  12. 


As  from  some  rock  that  overhangs  the  flood, 

The  silent  fisher  casts  th'  insidious  food, 

"With  fraudful  care  he  waits  the  finny  prize, 

And  sudden  lifts  it  quivering  to  the  skies  : 

So  the  foul  monster  lifts  her  prey  on  high, 

So  pant  the  wretches,  struggling  in  the  sky ; 

In  the  wide  dungeon  she  devours  her  food, 

And  the  flesh  trembles  while  she  churns  the  blood. 

Worn  as  I  am  with  griefs,  with  care  decay'd ; 

Never,  I  never,  scene  so  dire  survey'd  ! 

My  shivering  blood,  congeal'd  forgot  to  flow : 

Aghast  I  stood,  a  monument  of  wo  ! 

"  Now  from  the  rocks  the  rapid  vessel  flies, 
And  the  hoarse  din  like  distant  thunder  dies; 
To  Sol's  bright  isle  our  voyage  we  pursue, 
And  now  the  glittering  mountains  rise  to  view. 
There,  sacred  to  the  radiant  god  of  day, 
Graze  the  fair  herds,  the  flocks  promiscuous  stray : 
Then  suddenly  was  heard  along  the  main 
To  low  the  ox,  to  bleat  the  woolly  train  ! 
Straight  to  my  anxious  thoughts  the  sound  convey'd 
The  words  of  Circe  and  the  Theban  shade  j 
Warn'd  by  their  awful  voice  these  shores  to  shun, 
With  cautious  fears  oppress'd,  I  thus  begun : 

1  O  friends  !  Oh  ever  exercis'd  in  care  ! 
Hear  heaven's  commands,  and  reverence  what  ye  hear  I 
To  fly  these  shores  the  prescient  Theban  shade 
And  Circe  warns !  O  be  their  voice  obey'd  ! 
Some  mighty  wo  relentless  heaven  forebodes : 
Fly  these  dire  regions,  and  revere  the  gods  !' 

"  While  yet  I  spoke,  a  sudden  sorrow  ran  } 
Through  every  breast,  and  spread  from  man  to  man,  > 
Till  wrathful  thus  Eurylochus  began  ;  ) 

1  O  cruel  thou !  some  fury  sure  has  steel'd 
That  stubborn  soul,  by  toil  untaught  to  yield ! 


Book  12. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


231 


From  sleep  debarr'd,  we  sink  from  woes  to  woes ; 
And,  cruel,  enviest  thou  a  short  repose  ? 
Still  must  we  restless  rove,  new  seas  explore, 
The  sun  descending,  and  so  near  the  shore  ? 
And  lo  !  the  night  begins  her  gloomy  reign, 
And  doubles  all  the  terrors  of  the  main. 
Oft  in  the  dead  of  night  loud  winds  arise, 
Lash  the  wild  surge,  and  bluster  in  the  skies ; 
Oh  should  the  fierce  south  west  his  rage  display, 
And  toss  with  rising  storms  the  wat'ry  way, 
Though  gods  descend  from  heaven's  aerial  plain 
To  lend  us  aid,  the  gods  descend  in  vain : 
Then  while  the  night  displays  her  awful  shade, 
Sweet  time  of  slumber  !  be  the  night  obeyM  ! 
Haste  ye  to  land  !  and  when  the  morning  ray 
Sheds  her  bright  beams,  pursue  the  destin'd  way.' 

"  A  sudden  joy  in  every  bosom  rose ; 
So  will'd  some  daemon,  minister  of  woes! 

u  To  whom  with  grief:  '  O  swift  to  be  undone, 
Constraint  I  act  what  wisdom  bid  me  shun. 
But  yonder  herds  and  yonder  flocks  forbear; 
Attest  the  heavens,  and  call  the  gods  to  hear : 
Content,  an  innocent  repast  display, 
By  Circe  given,  and  fly  the  dangerous  prey.' 

"  Thus  I  :  and  while  to  shore  the  vessel  flies, 
With  hands  uplifted  they  attest  the  skies ; 
Then  where  a  fountain's  gurgling  waters  play, 
They  rush  to  land,  and  end  in  feasts  the  day : 
They  feed  ;  they  quaff ;  and  now  (their  hunger  fled) 
Sigh  for  their  friends  devour'd,  and  mourn  the  dead. 
Nor  cease  the  tears,  till  each  in  slumber  shares 
A  sweet  forgetfulness  of  human  cares. 

"  Now  far  the  night  advanced  her  gloomy  reign, 
And  setting  stars  roll'd  down  the  azure  plain  : 
"When,  at  the  voice  of  Jove,  wild  whirlwinds  rise, 
And  clouds  and  double  darkness  veil  the  skies  ; 


232 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  12. 


The  moon,  the  stars,  the  bright  ethereal  host, 
Seem  as  extinct,  and  all  their  splendours  lost; 
The  furious  tempest  roars  with  dreadful  sound  : 
Air  thunders,  rolls  the  ocean,  groans  the  ground. 
All  night  it  rag'd  ;  when  morning  rose,  to  land 
We  haul'd  our  bark,  and  moor'd  it  on  the  strand, 
Where  in  a  beauteous  grotto's  cool  recess 
Dance  the  green  Nereids  of  the  neighbouring  seas. 

4£  There  while  the  wild  winds  whistled  o'er  the  main. 
Thus  careful  1  address'd  the  listening  train : 

1  O  friends,  be  wise !  nor  dare  the  flocks  destroy 
Of  these  fair  pastures : — if  ye  touch,  ye  die. 
Warn'd  by  the  high  command  of  heaven,  be  aw'd; 
Holy  the  flocks,  and  dreadful  is  the  god  ! 
That  god  who  spreads  the  radiant  beams  of  light, 
And  views  wide  earth  and  heaven's  unmeasur'd  heights 

{<  And  now  the  moon  had  run  her  monthly  round, 
The  south  east  blustering  with  a  dreadful  sound  ; 
Unhurt  the  beeves,  untouched  the  woolly  train, 
Low  through  the  grove,  or  range  the  flowery  plain  : 
Then  fail'd  our  food  ;  then  fish  we  make  our  prey, 
Or  fowl  that  screaming  haunt  the  wat'ry  way. 
Till  now  from  sea  or  flood  no  succour  found, 
Famine  and  meager  want  besieg'd  us  round. 
Pensive  and  pale  from  grove  to  grove  1  stray'd, 
From  the  loud  storms  to  And  a  sylvan  shade ; 
There  o'er  my  hands  the  living  wave  1  pour; 
And  heaven  and  heaven's  immortal  thrones  adore,, 
To  calm  the  roarings  of  the  stormy  main, 
And  grant  me  peaceful  to  my  realms  again. 
Then  o'er  my  eyes  the  gods  soft  slumber  shed, 
While  thus  Eurylochus,  arising,  said: 

1  O  friends,  a  thousand  ways  frail  mortals  lead 
To  the  cold  tomb,  and  dreadful  all  to  tread ; 
But  dreadful  most,  when  by  a  slow  decay 
Pale  hunger  wastes  the  manly  strength  away. 


Book  12. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


233 


Why  cease  ye  then  t'  implore  the  powers  above, 
And  offer  hecatombs  to  thundering  Jove  1 
Why  seize  ye  not  yon  beeves,  and  fleecy  prey  1 
Arise  unanimous ;  arise  and  slay  ! 
And  if  the  gods  ordain  a  safe  return, 
To  Phoebus  shrines  shall  rise,  and  altars  burn. 
But  should  the  powers  that  o'er  mankind  preside, 
Decree  to  plunge  us  in  the  whelming  tide, 
Better  to  rush  at  once  to  shades  below, 
Than  linger  life  away,  and  nourish  wo !' 

u  Thus  he:  the  beeves  around  securely  stray, 
When  swift  to  ruin  they  invade  the  prey  ; 
They  seize,  they  kill !— -but  for  the  rite  divine, 
The  barley  fail'd,  and  for  libations,  wine. 
Swift  from  the  oak  they  strip  the  shady  pride ; 
And  verdant  leaves  the  flowery  cake  supplied. 

"  With  prayer  they  now  address  th'  ethereal  train, 
Slay  the  selected  beeves,  and  flay  the  slain  ; 
The  thighs,  with  fat  involv'd,  divide  with  art, 
Strew'd  o'er  with  morsels  cut  from  every  part. 
Water,  instead  of  wine,  is  brought  in  urns, 
And  pour'd  profanely  as  the  victim  burns. 
The  thighs  thus  offer'd,  and  the  entrails  dress'd, 
They  roast  the  fragments  and  prepare  the  feast. 

'  'Twas  then  soft  slumber  fled  my  troubled  brain  ; 
Back  to  the  bark  I  speed  along  the  main. 
When  lo !  an  odour  from  the  feast  exhales, 
Spreads  o'er  the  coast,  and  scents  the  tainted  gales; 
A  chilly  fear  congeal'd  my  vital  blood, 
And  thus,  obtesting  heaven,  I  mourn'd  aloud : 

1  O  sire  of  men  and  gods,  immortal  Jove ! 
Oh  all  ye  blissful  powers  that  reign  above ! 
Why  were  my  cares  beguil'd  in  short  repose? 
O  fatal  slumber,  paid  with  lasting  woes ! 
A  deed  so  dreadful  all  the  gods  alarms, 
Vengeance  is  on  the  wing,  and  heaven  in  arms !' 


234 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Book  12. 


11  Meantime  Lampetie  mounts  thJ  aerial  way, 
And  kindles  into  rage  the  god  of  day  : 

c  Vengeance,  ye  powers  (he  cries,)  and  thou  whose 
hand 

Aims  the  red  bolt,  and  hurls  the  writhen  brand ! 
Slain  are  those  herds  which  I  with  pride  survey, 
When  through  the  ports  of  heaven  I  pour  the  day, 
Or  deep  in  ocean  plunge  the  burning  ray. 
Vengeance,  ye  gods  !  or  1  the  skies  forego, 
And  bear  the  lamp  of  heaven  to  shades  below.' 

"  To  whom  the  thundering  power  :  '  O  source  of  day! 
Whose  radiant  lamp  adorns  the  azure  way, 
Still  may  thy  beams  through  heaven's  bright  portals 
rise, 

The  joy  of  earth  and  glory  of  the  skies  ; 
Lo !  my  red  arm  I  bare,  my  thunders  guide, 
To  dash  th5  offenders  in  the  whelming  tide.' 

"  To  fair  Calypso  from  the  bright  abodes, 
Hermes  convey'd  these  councils  of  the  gods. 

11  Meantime  from  man  to  man  my  tongue  exclaims, 
My  wrath  is  kindled,  and  my  soul  in  flames  : 
In  vain  !  I  view  perform'd  the  direful  deed, 
Beeves,  slain  by  heaps,  along  the  ocean  bleed. 

"  Now  heaven  gave  signs  of  wrath  ;  along  the  ground  } 
Crept  the  raw  hides,  and  with  a  bellowing  sound  > 
Roar'd  the  dead  limbs  ;  the  burning  entrails  groan'd.  ) 
Six  guilty  days  my  wretched  mates  employ 
In  impious  feasting,  and  unhallow'd  joy  : 
The  seventh  arose,  and  now  the  sire  of  gods 
Rein'd  the  rough  storms,  and  calm'd  the  tossing  floods ; 
With  speed  the  bark  we  climb  ;  the  spacious  sails 
Loos'd  from  the  yards  invite  th'  impelling  gales. 
Past  sight  of  shore  along  the  surge  we  bound, 
And  all  above  is  sky,  and  ocean  all  around  ! 
When  lo  !  a  murky  cloud  the  thunderer  forms 
Full  o'er  our  heads,  and  blackens  heaven  with  storms. 


Book  12. 


THE  ODYSSEY. 


Night  dwells  o'er  all  the  deep :  and  now  out  flies 
The  gloomy  west,  and  whistles  in  the  skies. 
The  mountain-billows  roar  !  the  furious  blast 
Howls  o'er  the  shroud,  and  rends  it  from  the  mast : 
The  mast  gives  way,  and  crackling  as  it  bends. 
Tears  up  the  deck ;  then  all  at  once  descends  : 
The  pilot  by  the  tumbling  ruin  slain, 
Dash'd  from  the  helm,  falls  headlong  in  the  main. 
Then  Jove  in  anger  bids  his  thunders  roll, 
And  forky  lightnings  flash  from  pole  to  pole; 
Fierce  at  our  heads  his  deadly  bolt  he  aims. 
Red  with  uncommon  wrath,  and  wrapt  in  flames ; 
Full  on  the  bark  it  fell :  now  high,  now  low, 
Toss'd  and  retoss'd,  it  reel'd  beneath  the  blow ; 
At  once  into  the  main  the  crew  it  shook  : 
Sulphureous  odours  rose,  and  smouldering  smoke. 
Like  fowl  that  haunt  the  floods,  they  sink,  they  rise, 
Now  lost,  now  seen,  with  shrieks  and  dreadful  cries; 
And  strive  to  gain  the  bark  ;  but  Jove  denies. 
Firm  at  the  helm  I  stand,  when  fierce  the  main 
Rush'd  with  dire  noise,  and  dash'd  the  sides  in  twain 
Again  impetuous  drove  the  furious  blast, 
Snapt  the  strong  helm,  and  bore  to  sea  the  mast. 
Firm  to  the  mast  with  cords  the  helm  I  bind,  } 
And  ride  aloft,  to  Providence  resign'd,  > 
Through  tumbling  billows,  and  a  war  of  wind.  ) 

"  Now  sunk  the  west,  and  now  a  southern  breeze, 
More  dreadful  than  the  tempest,  lash'd  the  seas; 
For  on  the  rocks  it  bore  where  Scylla  raves, 
And  dire  Charybdis  roll  her  thundering  waves. 
All  night  I  drove ;  and,  at  the  dawn  of  day, 
Fast  by  the  rocks  beheld  the  desperate  way  : 
Just  when  the  sea  within  her  gulfs  subsides, 
And  in  the  roaring  whirlpools  rush  the  tides, 
Swift  from  the  float  I  vaulted  with  a  bound, 
The  lofty  fig-tree  seiz'd,  and  clung  around ; 


236 


THE    ODYSSEY.  Book 


So  to  the  beam  the  bat  tenacious  clings, 
And  pendent  round  it  clasps  his  leathern  wings. 
High  in  the  air  the  tree  its  boughs  display'd, 
And  o'er  the  dungeon  cast  a  dreadful  shade ; 
All  unsustain'd  between  the  wave  and  sky, 
Beneath  my  feet  the  whirling  billows  fly. 
What  time* the  judge  forsakes  the  noisy  bar 
To  take  repast,  and  stills  the  wordy  war, 
Chary bdis,  rumbling  from  her  inmost  caves, 
The  mast  refunded  on  her  refluent  waves. 
Swift  from  the  tree,  the  floating  mast  to  gain, 
Sudden  I  dropp'd  amidst  the  flashing  main ; 
Once  more  undaunted  on  the  ruin  rode, 
And  oar'd  with  labouring  arms  along  the  flood, 
Unseen  I  pass'd  by  Seylla's  dire  abodes: 
So  Jove  decreed  (dread  sire  of  men  and  gods ;) 
Then  nine  long  days  I  plough  the  calmer  seas, 
Heav'd  by  the  surge,  and  wafted  by  the  breeze. 
Weary  and  wet  th*  Ogygian  shores  I  gain, 
When  the  tenth  sun  descended  to  the  main. 
There  in  Calypso's  ever-fragrant  bowers 
Refresh 'd  I  lay,  and  joy  beguil'd  the  hours. 

"  My  following  fates  to  thee,  O  king,  are  knowna 
And  the  bright  partner  of  thy  royal  throne. 
Enough  ;  in  misery  can  words  avail  ? 
And  what  so  tedious  as  a  twice-told  tale  V% 


V 

y 

/ 


DATE  DUE 





nov  sat 


£3 


DEMCO  38-297 


/ 


